I'm your host, Sean Carroll. Cancer is one of the most terrible things we have to deal with in human life. It's a potentially fatal disease, of course. We're all going to die someday. That's something that maybe we can make our peace with. But unlike many other diseases, cancer seems arbitrary in ways that are hard to pin down. It can happen anyone. It can happen at any stage of your life. Young people can get it as well as old people when you reach a certain stage of your life, like I have. Not only you have to worry about checking for it yourself, but you know people who have had cancer and even who have died because of it. So it's very natural that as a species, we put a lot of effort into figuring out what is going on, how to stop this, turns out to be really, really difficult as maybe you know. Today's conversation is going to be with one of the world's leaders in the field of fighting cancer, James Allison, who won the Nobel Prize a few years ago in physiology and medicine for one of the ways, one of the various techniques that we can use to attack cancer once it starts. The idea being rather than going in and just zapping the cells with radiation or chemicals or whatever, that we can use immunotherapy. In other words, we learn how to control the body's own existing immune system to fight the cancer tumors. And if this can work, it works in some cases, doesn't work in others yet. This is what we're studying and we'll talk about in the episode. But it's not just a more organic natural way to fight the disease, but then the person who has had the therapy has that extra layer of protection against getting cancer going forward. You haven't just killed that tumor or most of that tumor. You've built up the body's defense systems. So of course, that is for real world purposes, a fascinating and important development for science purposes. Of course, it's also fascinating because, man, the body, very, very complicated, very, very complex networks of reactions and cells and proteins and molecules and all that going on. We learn a lot about it because we are motivated for reasons of making people healthier. But what we learn is also equally fascinating. So we'll talk about how we got here, where we're going and how I think the impression I get as an interested outsider is real progress is being made on one of the trickiest problems out there. So let's go. James Allison, welcome to the Mindscape podcast. Thank you, Greta, for here. I guess this is a big topic, right? I mean, you do research on cancer therapies and things like that. Let's start at the very lowest level here. We've all heard of cancer. It's bad. Something about cells dividing and going crazy. How do you think about what cancer is, broadly speaking? I think it's a plague. I was sort of unfortunately involves your own body going awry in some way and a lot of, I don't know, there's a lot of, used to be a lot of stigma associated with it. Maybe there still is some cases, but it's an unfortunate thing that happens to us. We have a lot of cells that comprise our body if they don't aren't controlled. It's amazing to me that it works as well as it does. Everything stays under control. Unfortunately, it hits people. It hits a lot of people way too many. It's way too many in my family. I guess the question I have is, is it the same phenomenon when we talk about different kinds of cancer? I mean, there's obviously a wide variety and there's some therapies work better than others. Is it accurate to call it one thing? No, it's not. Well, it depends. I mean, the common thing is, is cells growing when they aren't too and where they aren't too. I mean, that's the common thing of all of them. But no, they're very different. They're different tissues. First of all, that's why it used to be classified solid, you know, in muscle or whatever. Solid tissue versus leukemia, you know, in the blood. And then now it's lung versus, you know, colon or bladder versus prostate or whatever. But then with the advent of genomic sequencing and everything, the tendency was to attribute them to the causation. You know, first, crudely, you know, carcinobusly carcinogen and duse, obviously virus and duse or something. Although, viruses are tiny fraction, but it's not zero, but that's not the main thing. But the common thing is just mutation. The functional classification, according to causation, can be useful. And for a while, it was thought was the real key. You know, if you know like, rassism molecule that really is involved in a pathway that takes signals outside of cell like wounding or something and tells the cell, well, you better divide because we need to cover up that scrape or that, fix that cut or whatever. But if something happens, that pathway gets locked on, you know, so the doorbells ring and all the time, you know, the cells just keep dividing. And the idea was, well, if we get an imit that pathway, then we cured cancer, all right. So this was all the excitement around nearly 2000s, 2010, through about 2015 was, most of these enzymes that do these sort of things are carcinocytes or forms thereof. And so that is, you can just inhibit that enzyme. You can cure the cancer by attacking the cause. Turns out, good idea, way too simple because pathways always have multiple steps. And you could fix one of them, but then if there's another mutation downstream, you're back to where you started and your drug goes nothing. And so that's what the problem is because tumors, as they progress, as the tumors become more and more strange as they start, they become unstable and the genome actually becomes very unstable. And they start, you start getting a lot of more mutations. And as soon as that happens, you have more drivers that are called. And so you can take one out. It doesn't make any difference. You can cure 99% killed 99% of the tumor cells. Doesn't make any difference because 1% or 0.1%. We'll have another driver and they'll inevitably grow out. That's interesting. Actually, I don't think I knew that that the rate of mutation in the tumor gets much larger. So as the tumor is growing, you're not just finding one kind of cell. Yeah, that's not totally universal, but generally it's true that the tumors become, as they progress, become less and less stable. And so the idea of having a magic bullet that can attack it at its source is really, was not unreasonable and was impossible to even think of doing anything about it too. We had genomics sequencing, which we do now, but now we know it's probably not going to be, it's certainly worth doing because it could prolong life. I've always been immunologist to look at things differently because the tumor biologist who have to take the classical tumor biology view or cancer would say, oh, you got that mutation, let's attack it and we'll be done so we should concentrate on what's going on there. On the other hand, so there's lots of mutations. The mutation really occur pretty much randomly and it's when they hit. So they've got to hit generally a couple of genes before you've got problems, a couple of very types of genes that are very specific. But the other ones, the class ofologists say, oh, those are a relabatic passengers, they're not important because they're not drivers. Immune system, on the other hand, you know, changes in immunologists. Immune system is just its purpose is to find things that shouldn't be there. They're what they do. You know, that shouldn't be on myself. That's how they have a virus in it. I'm going to kill it. And so then you look at it that way and those mutations, which the cancer biologists are not important because they're not the drivers. Yeah. So it's equally important to the immune system. Immune system doesn't know the difference. It just does. There's something different here. We better get rid of that guy. We already mentioned that it's a little bit surprising to you that the body lasts as long as it does and works as well as it does. I mean, I see that and I also see someone else saying it's kind of amazing to me that bodies haven't learned to fight cancer better since it's all over the place. Yeah. Well, evolutionarily, you know, it's all evolution. Unless it takes you out before you reproduce, there's evolution doesn't care. You know, if you get cancer, we're in your 50 evolution doesn't care. Right. That's really not it. It's crazy. But some animal species are pretty good at avoiding cancer. It does seem to be possible. Do we understand that? No. No, it's for dead. No. I think people who are maybe they have a really good immune system. I doubt it. I doubt it. Isn't there some? This is very vague to me. I mean, there's a lot of paradox that larger animals, you might expect to get cancer more easily because there's more cells, but in fact, they get it more rarely. Yeah. Now, that's true. I guess elephants don't, as far as I know, elephants don't get cancer very often. But then again, maybe they're not exposed to carcinogens like we are. That's true. But mice happily, we're able to give cancer to because we that's where we do a lot of tests. Not for the good for the mice, but. So how much do we know about, I know this is not, you just sort of just very nicely explained why this is not what you care most about, but how much do we know about how tumors start? And is there, is it just a myriad of various different reasons or is there some central understanding? Well, there's some such an understanding. I think what it comes down to, if you look at all the data that exists is that it's basically mutations that cause that end. If you get out of the sun a lot and you expose your skin to ultraviolet radiation, the chances are you're going to get mutations in your skin that can cause melanoma because that's, you know, what the sunlight hits and. And you know, stay out of the sun, you're probably not going to get melanoma, although for many people, same in lung cancer, you smoke, you know, you're highly, you know, you're a lot more likely to get, but you're not, if you don't smoke it, I mean, you're not going to get long cancer, because it sells divide, there's, there's, there are mistakes. You know, you're obviously going to tell us about immunotherapies, but maybe put that in the context of other kinds of therapies. I mean, we've all heard of chemotherapy, radiation therapies, etc. Let's go back to the dark. Let's go back way in the start, you know, there's evidence in the Greeks, you know, knew about tumors and they cut them off. Okay. And so the very first cancer therapy was surgery. Got it. Yes. And that still is perhaps the most effective. If you can get it all, that's the problem though, because by the time you, certain kind of cancers in particular, like melanoma, very often by the time you notice it and then you're kind of big way, it's already spread to other organs in your body, prostate, my, so we've even catch it early, surgery is pretty effective. The next therapy that came along was radiation, you know, the curries around the end of the 19th century, beginning of the 20th century, Madam Curie in particular, developed radiotherapy and that was quite useful and curative in some cases. Of course, it also caused cancer, you know, people learned by the skin of genic effects, but the idea was you blast the cell and give it enough mutations that it can't live. The problem of course is that it also kills the normal tissues. So they got to be careful about that. I mean, oddly enough, with the advent of mustard gases and things during WWI and chemical warfare agents that were developed leading into WWII, ultimately led to some pioneers in cancer therapy in the 50s, you know, applying it to leukemias, childhood leukemias in particular, mustard, I mean, just, it's toxic gases that toxic chemicals that were used to mustard gas, for example, those were the basis of the first chemotherapy, they killed dividing cells. Why are they good at killing the cancer cells? They cause a lot more mutations, you know, as they screw up the DNA as it's dividing and make it sure that the cell can't successfully divide without making it. Unfortunately, you could also put in a lot of mutations that will make World War III clear to get a cancer down the road, too. But they also, but the bottom line with that, with both of those both radiotherapy and chemotherapy as given, unless you kill every last tumor cell with those techniques, those approaches to it, the tumor is going to win because it'll just come back. And so you have to blast them so hard with radiation or poison them so much that it makes you sick, your hair falls out. The lining of your gut comes out, you don't make new blood cells or immune systems blown away, you know, and you're sick. And that's, you know, that's what I saw when I was going up and my mother and two of her brothers and my brother and it's, it's, you know, it's a devastating thing, not just the cancer, but the consequences of therapies. This episode of Mindscape is sponsored by Better Health. When it comes to relationships, we often hear about the red flags we should avoid. But what if we focus more on looking for the green flags in friends and partners? If you're not sure what green flags look like, therapy could help you identify them. Actively practice them in your relationships and embody the green flag energy yourself. Whether you're dating, married, building a friendship or just working on yourself, it's time to form relationships that love you back. One of the great things about therapy is by looking inside yourself, you can both learn to take those warning signs seriously, but also learn to be open to new experiences and new things. To know when something might be worth pursuing. Better Health is a fully online service that makes therapy affordable and convenient, serving over 5 million people worldwide. You can easily switch therapists any time at no extra cost. So discover your relationship green flags with Better Health. Visit BetterHelp.com slash Mindscape today to get 10% off your first month. That's BetterHelpHELP.com slash Mindscape. And do tumors spread just because the cells in the tumors sort of get carried around by the blood system? Or... It's a little more complicated or math. They're signals that tell them to stay where they are. Those could be lost. But they could also develop things on their service that will tell them where you really belong over here. So it'll leave. I mean, that's the way they get theirs through the blood, but it's more complicated. There has to be changes that allow them to get into the blood and other changes that allow them to get out of the blood and into the tissue that they're going into. So that's a whole nother area of metastasis of study that's underrated blood. My understanding is that you started as an actual chemist more than a sort of biologist or a medical person. Yeah. Well, a biochemist. I got bored with chemistry and biochemistry quickly. And actually then when I was... But again, I had this family history of cancer which made me... I was interested. Ultimately, I was interested in biology. I started in biochemistry because that's just... I don't know where I landed. But then as I learned about the immune system, T cells had just been discovered shortly before I was an undergraduate. I was really fascinated by the whole idea of the immune system. But there's mostly antibodies and B cells at the time, but then when T cells came along, I was lucky enough to have an immunology course as an undergraduate University of Texas and Bill Manny's a professor towards the end of the semester. He talked about these new cells that have been discovered called T cells that percolate all through your body. It was known. They go all through your body. Not only just going around in the blood and then the lymph, but they actually go through your tissues. Screen yourselves. And see what's going on. We were the remotest corner of your body. It was being surveilled, I guess, the proper... By the immune system to make sure nothing's going awry. And that's one of the reasons we're able to keep it all together without going completely bananas, you know, one of the reasons early on. First of all, most of the mechanisms for replicating are pretty damn accurate. But if they're accurate, 99.9% of the time, that's not enough. Not enough. But there are a lot of problems. They're a variety of white blood cells. Yeah, yeah. A variety of them. Yeah, lymphocytes are one kind, but they're also macrophages. They're largely, I guess I would say two families of them. Lymphoid cells and myeloid cells. Myeloid cells are like macrophages and things like that. In Gulf bacteria, infected cells are dying debris from dying cells and clean up wounds. All that stuff and help wounds repair. And they have innate signals that are called that they can recognize a lot of viruses, a lot of bacteria, just because they have carbohydrates and things on their surface that is clases of molecules are different than those found in our cells, mammalian cells. So they're so this... Recall them in innate because everybody's got those. So they can protect you against a lot of organisms. But that's not enough either. And so late evolution with development of actually not shortly after vertebrates and things. But anyway, evolutionarily, this other system came on, which we call the adaptive immune system, where you actually have receptors that are made by random recombination of DNA. Sequences, I don't want to go with the details, but basically it's essentially random process. They give you a random set of different receptors. It's been calculated that you can make all things if you have full building to make. Every receptor that can be made with the structures that are in there, it's really a fascinating area of biology that... And it's all of them, but it's 10 to the 15th, maybe 10 to the 17th power. You only have about 10 to the 10th cells in the 12th cells. So it's a thousand times more cells than total cells, at least a thousand times more total cells than you have in your body. So each of us really realize only a fraction of the possible diversity of different T cells receptors that could be made into the species. But the population is protected probably, but not the individual necessarily. Well, I was going to ask, do the T cells in our body develop new receptors? Do they learn on the job or does the body make new cells? They're generated essentially randomly. Okay. The cells come out of the bone marrow for T cells. They come out of the bone marrow. They go to this organ called the thymus, which sits right above the heart. And there they start developing from a precursor stem cell into functional T cells, my random rearrangements. And they're put together. And there's this fascinating testing system where there's a scaffold on cells that presents the antigens, which are little bits of protein that are only 8 to 10 amino acids, 8 to 12, maybe amino acids long, that are presented in the surface of the stag. It looks like a hot dog bun. It's got a peptide in the middle of it. There's a peptide for virtually every protein that's made in your body that'll bind there. And it will be put on the surface of your cells. So the immune system knows a sample of everything that's going on in the cell. Even if the thing normally wouldn't be on the cell surface. If it's virus, there's just infected a cell. And the cell starts making bits of virus. I mean, making the parts of the virus that it needs to reproduce and grow to affect other cells. As they're making it, those proteins will be cut into little pieces and pieces that will be put on the surface. And then the right T cell comes by and says, whoops, that shouldn't be there. They don't kill it. So they're having them. So the cell is sort of doing its own annual checkup at all times. Exactly. But you got to get rid of a lot of those. They're going to be harmful. They may be harmful. And so they got the tumor. I mean, the thymus not only educates the cells, the stuff which ones can be useful, but gets rid of the ones which will hurt you. And hopefully, if they don't, you end up with diabetes. So you end up with different autoimmune syndromes and stuff. So sorry, these are T cells that can be dangerous if they're not in the right kind. Yeah, if they're auto reactive, they react with self-procative. But sometimes if a virus comes in and tricks the immune system into thinking something's foreign, when it's closely enough to a self thing, occasionally you'll get a spillover can be damaged like for measles and stuff down the road. But anyway, basically, they're pretty damn good though. Yeah. This is where my simple physics brain rebells at the complexity of all the networks inside the human body. It's kind of an amazing edifice. Yeah, how many stars are there? Two to the three. A lot of stars, but stars are pretty similar to each other. There's 10 to the 22 stars out there, but they're not that different. There's no lock and key in there. I mean, I guess that's my question. That you're talking about receptors. Reminds me of people who are trying to study smell and how we're sensitive to different kinds of molecules. Is it a similar kind of thing going on? Yeah, in a way, except that there what you have is one kind of receptor for each kind of bit of a smell. And there's some of all those that tells you what the overall smell is. But each one only detects one thing and the brain integrates it all. Yeah. It's here. You've got all these different ones that are flowing all around and all you need to do is trigger one. And so the job of a T cell is to understand what the normal healthy cells are like and target anything that is not that. Not self recognition is what it's called. Very philosophically, very. How do you recognize not self? But they do a pretty good job, like you said. And yet we still get cancer. So there's some reason why, I guess, in principle, they can attack cancers, but they don't do as well as they could. Yeah, that's first of all, because the cancer cells are not necessarily all that different. They are especially, although they get weirder and we're with with with time and often with a lot more mutations. But they also have ways of protecting themselves. You know, your cells don't like to be killed either. For example, in tumor cells, there's a process called apoptosis and they're there are mechanisms that guard cells built into the cell or mechanisms for detecting mutations. If there's too many, the cell tries to commit suicide. It's told to kill yourself because you're going to get my cause cancer, at least that's the the thought, but they're the suppressor genes, which do that. So really, in order to get cancer, you've got to not only get an activating gene, which will tell the cell not to be a cancer, but you've got to get rid of those suppressor genes, but shut that down. So genetically, it's complicated too, because you really have to have both in order to get it. That's right for people with retina, blastoma gene, for example. If you have two copies of that, kids get tumors of their eyes with about two years old. It's a devastating disease, but in other kinds of cancer, you don't get them in your germ line, but you can get them in your somatic cells. And if you lose the RB genes, that makes you a lot in a cell. That makes that cell a lot more likely to get cancer. That helps because I did have the question, do tumors or do cancer cells defend themselves? They don't pass on their genes, in some sense. But I guess the answer is, but there are versions of or made of ordinary cells, which do have defense mechanisms. Yeah. And they also, one of the things that we found recently that's even more interesting to me is that the immune system, ever now, and then these macrophages who play a role in cleaning up after wounds and wound healing in the place where they'll protect the tumor too. They'll protect the wound. So your own immune system can turn around. And we're finding that that's one of the reasons that happens big time in pancreatic cancer and then glioblastoma, which are tumors that are very lethal. And we're still, it's not that we got the T cell issues solved with those, but what we know is their myeloid cells there that are trying to stop the T cells from killing the tissue because they're just doing what that's their normal functions to protect tissue and help with heal. They just get in a weird situation where they are treating the tumor like a wound and protecting it from the immune system. So that's one of the things that we're working on now is trying to find out some way to override that or change the myeloid cells where they'll help, they could also help the T cells. It depends on what they're doing. It's a whole new area of biology that that single cell RNA techniques and things to make us realize that they're talking about T cells, they used to be B cells and T cells. Now they're T cells specifically. First there were two kinds and there were five kinds. Now they're about seven kinds. The truth is that those kinds are just constructs that we make up. In biology it's a continuity. It's just a continual spread. In myeloid cells it's really pronounced. You can see all these different cells. They differ by two or three genes that are being expressed. And you can just shift the population one way or another and that's what we're trying to figure out. And then shift them from this protective overall effect to the helping, you know, thing to help the immune system rather than under it. One impression I get from reading about these are talking to people is that everything is about switches, turning things on and off. Once you realize that every cell has the same DNA in it, I guess it makes sense because they do very different things but it's all a matter of which parts of them are playing a role at this particular role. Yeah, which genes are turned on and how much and it's the relative amounts of different genes in some cases. The complexity is amazing and so our brains cut box things but nature does. How much, you know, it sounds like with the receptor stuff on the wall of the T cell, that's right down to the level of atomic and molecular structure, right? Is it very different how we're studying that now than when we're in like 1980s or whatever it was, like is the technology change things? Well, yeah, I mean in the 70s, nobody knew where the T cell receptor was. That was my first thing when I got into immunology was what is the antigen receptor? What is it that the T cell uses? Nobody knew what it was and so I put on my biochemist hat and said, well, what should such a molecule look like and worked it out and published that for the first time in 82. It's going to look like this and I had data and stuff and then the genes were calmed a couple of years later and confirmed that that's what it was an alpha chain embedded and two chains of protein, both of which have constant regions and then variable regions. And outside they give you the combining site. But how is it presented? And so there was this, I don't go to the details too much, but that's another complicated thing, how the molecule, that hot dog, every wiener won't fit into that bun. Everybody bunts a little bit different, holes a different kind of wiener. And so if you've got the right bun for the peptide, you can present it if you don't, you won't. So that's another, if you can't present a peptide, even though it's there and it's from a cancer, then the T cells aren't going to see it. We don't mind a little bit of details here, you're allowed? Like if you really want to go into details, we'll go with you a little bit. Okay, well I won't go anymore, but it's a complicated thing. But we didn't know this stuff until the 80s, the 90s and now it's we're beginning to understand some detail. And now with a lot of the work in terms of really understanding the biology of it, some of this new work from the Nobel Prize, this should have David Baker, for example, and understanding how to balance sequence in forms, shapes and how shapes, influence, sequence, all this, we're beginning to understand the molecule and I won't know how these interactions occur and how to manipulate them a little bit better in ways we couldn't even think about 10 years ago, much less in the 80s. A lot of us start the new year saying that we will learn a new language, but it's hard to actually commit to it. Bappel makes it easy to learn one in less time than you think. Bappel's quick 10 minute lessons handcrafted by over 200 language experts, get you to begin speaking your new language in three weeks or whatever pace you choose. And because conversing is the key to really understanding each other in new languages, Bappel is designed using practical, real world conversations. What I love about Bappel is you can either dive in deeply and truly get fluent or you can just master some of the basics before going on a trip. So let's get more of you talking in a new language. Bappel is gifting our listeners 60% off subscriptions at babble.com slash mindscape. Get up to 60% off at babble.com slash mindscape spelled B-A-B-B-E-L dot com slash mindscape. Rules and restrictions may apply. I do love the idea that even before you really had any direct evidence of what it looked like, you could sit back and think, well, what should it look like to do the job that it does? Some sense that so people did DNA too. Yeah, I'm one of these old school guys that thinks hypothesis are yours. Yeah. Now it's get a whole bunch of data and try to pull something out of it. Can we at the level now where we take pictures of not just T cells, but the actual receptors that are on them? Yeah, pretty much. Pretty much. Those are the things that have a 10 to 17. That's really helping with vaccine design. Right. And stuff now. So we're on the verge of being able to, in some cases, develop prophylactic vaccines, I think. Certainly for HPV, we're there. We can prevent HPV induced cervical cancer and headnet cancer. By the HPV vaccine, if it was people who just use it, the more importantly, in the clinical realm, or therapeutic vaccines now, then we understand, we're beginning to understand enough about the antigens that are induced by the mutations where we can begin to come up. This was something that was greatly informed about the epidemic, with the vaccine strategies that were developed there, where you've got basically a cassette approach now where we know how to really put a gene in the middle of this cassette. I mean, we're going to think of, I think we're going to come up. There's going to be eventually a small set of adapters, you know, you can use. It'll have all the signals that you need to properly activate the innate immune system and all that. But you put your specific thing in the middle of it, and we can generate a vaccine in weeks. Pretty good. I mean, is this part of the sort of CRISPR revolution of gene editing? That's part of it. Yeah, it's part of it being able to get the genes out. It's more useful right now in testing, is to whether you're right, by actually doing fine structure, if you can initiate or terminate an immune response by, you know, manipulating things. But yeah, it's that. And just all the work that we're developing about the coronavirus vaccines, the COVID vaccines. But that's sort of framework. It's not exactly the same thing, it's going to be something very similar, which now you can theoretically take a melanoma patient, sequence the genome, and with computer algorithms predict which of the mutations would actually elicit in your own body because different people's, it's called MHC type, the genes that you have that influence what you present. If you know that, and you know the sequence of the different peptides, you can predict which ones will be presented. I mean, you can just have the proper vaccine to snap it into that thing and start vaccinating people. So that's coming along. I think that preventive vaccine is pretty soon. We're going to be able to maybe protect people that have what's called, oh, what is it? Lynch syndrome. They get a lot of polyps, you know, I mean, I'd virtually go on and develop colon cancer. It's definitely predisposition you can predict, but there are mutations, common mutations associated with that that I think if you immunized early enough, you could protect those people from ever developing the disease by immunizing them later. Maybe the same will happen with BRCA, you know, BRCA mutations are associated with, and women with breast cancer and over and cancer. And men also with certain kinds of cancer, but it may be possible to prepare vaccines there. But most of the times that mutations are so individual, individually specific to you that there's no way you're going to have a vaccine. You can prophylactically treat the population for most cancers. You're going to have to come up with something really powerful and it jumps to a response as soon as you detect it. I think we're getting close. We're not there yet. But I was actually going to ask about the role of simulations. I mean, as in physics and astronomy, of course, that's what we do all the time. We simulate things. We test them against the data. I've always had the impression that in biology, the state of the art was that biological things are too complicated to do that and too specific and too individual. So we have to actually test the pharmaceutical in a living thing rather than just putting it on a computer. Yeah. We're still there. Although it's better now. We could guess. We can make it to educate in guesses now. We can't get exactly there. So we have this basic security force in our body of the T cells roaming around looking for interlopers. You mentioned a little bit about this already, but why is it that they aren't better at attacking cancer and how can we make them better? That seems to be the project, right? Yeah. Well, again, it's because one of them is big. And it's largely their individual. So your tumor has mutations that nobody else has. So you got to tailor it to the individual. And secondly, there are the ways that the tumor can lose. For example, the peptide has to be from the from the containing the mutation has to get on the cell surface by these MHC molecules. And if you lose the expression of MHC molecules, then they're invisible to the immune system of tumors. They'll be there still making the mutation still be being made. But the immune system can't see it because it doesn't get to the surface of the cell. There are ways around that that we've got to have them. But that's what happens. And it's been shown in melanoma, for example, patients. Just quit making them all a killer. It carries it. But there are ways there are other ways around that we're getting to come up with. But that's one easy mechanism. Another one is that one of the main ways that tumors kill tumor cells is by making gamma interferon, which is a cytokine that I mean, you've heard of. But whatever its activity is besides helping protect your ginspar, it'll cause us tumor cells to quit dividing and can kill many of them. But if you lose anything along the receptor downstream of the gamma interferon, the thing that detects gamma interferon, it tells the cell it's around. If you mutate anything in that pathway, then that doesn't work anymore either. And so the T cells can make all the gamma interferon they want, but tumor won't respond to it. So there's that too. So what is our goal as immunotherapists? Are we trying to teach the T cells to ignore some of these? Well, first is just to get the T cells. And then secondly, in importance, there's someone about the myeloid cells, which we're not there yet. We're getting close on the T cells. The myeloid cell, we're only beginning there. But ultimately, how do we deal with these things that comes down? So it's not that you get the T cells to do any better, but you could come up with ways of making them work at a distance. It's kind of hard to explain, but a different type of T cell. They'll make more soluble factors. Maybe see the antigen on the myeloid cell, even though the tumors can't present it. If these myeloid cells, which will be gobbling up or tumor cell dies, they'll pick up pieces of it, put it on their surface. If they have the antigen, or T cells sees it there, and they can make enough of these gamma interferons or other things, then they can kill the tumor cells at a distance, even though they don't interact physically directly with the tumor cell anymore. We could show that happens in animal models, at least I'm pretty sure it happens in people as well. Okay, I mean, I read a little bit about the T cells before talking to you, but I didn't read anything about myeloid cells. Maybe you should tell me something about that. It sounds like they're important. Yeah, that's the reason. I mean, I used to avoid the things like a plague because they're so complicated and similar to different types. But what we've found, I mean, we, I'm speaking there, not as just me, but the field, again, to realize is the tumors which don't respond well to T cell-based therapies. Usually you have really large populations of myeloid cells in them. So that raised the interest. And sure enough, you could show that the myeloid cells can inhibit T cells. And we've found two molecules of myeloid cells that do that. And we've shown if you take them away, then we can make the T cells more effective. So that leads rise to some more strategies where you target the myeloid cells. Which you could have to do both, particularly in things like pancreatic and and gruelblastoma. What are the myeloid cells? What's their role when everything is going well? Gobble up bacteria that come in, deal with the vanibodies. If you've made antibodies and they're binding devices or bacteria and clumping them up to gobble them, get rid of the bugs that way. As I said, to wound heals, to help wounds heal, to make growth factors and stuff, just sort of generally handymen. They're just sort of general handymen that do whatever fixer-uppers are. But they can get in the way. And they have this spin-off effect that they can basically communicate the existence of a tumor to the T cells? They can check them right. Yeah. Or they can hide them from the tumor cells too. They can hide the tumor cell from the T cells too. Right. If things are going badly. And isn't there also my very vague understanding popping up? But you can get in trouble if you make too many T cells. Yeah. If you make too many T cells, you can definitely get sick. And especially if they react with normal cells or something that makes them excitable factors that affect. And that unfortunately is one of the main side effects of the therapies is cost reactivity with normal tissues and things. That there's no free lunch. You start messing with those things. I mean, it's not that it always happens. I know of at least one marathoner who got melanoma and went through the whole course of therapy and never missed a race. Oh, wow. You know, other people are getting very sick. And sometimes there can be things which can be fatal. Thank God they're rare. And the clinicians now know from experience of just developing algorithms for recognizing when it's about to happen and heading it off or at least reversing it early on. And it's still got time. And by the therapy, I mean, it sounds like what we're doing is sort of trying to regulate the amount and the sensitivity of these different cells in our immune system, presumably by giving people drugs. Drugs in the form of right now, the popular things are antibodies. These are just proteins that we can make that are very specific. I mean, that's what we did with C2L4 in the 90s. You know, there was a smaller kill and it was funny. It looked like a molecule that was the gas pedal on T cells. But this molecule called C2L4 and we showed that it was actually not a gas pedal. It was a break. And there's a people that called it a gas pedal. What they did was they had T cells that put them in culture, activated them and then add an antibody and they'd get more. And they said, okay, well, that's a gas pedal. That's what we did earlier in the 80s show that CD28 and other molecules like the gas pedal. So the antigen receptor you could think of is the ignition switch. That's all it is. It tells them T cell. But a T cell has to get a second signal at the same time, which is like the gas pedal. And that's a molecule called CD28 that we showed in the late 80s. You know, was the gas pedal. If you don't push on that, activating through the antigen receptor doesn't do any get it at all. T cells don't do anything. Tumors never have on their solid tumors, I should say. Don't have the structure that binds to that gas pedal. So it's complicated. So tumors are inherently solid tumors are invisible to the immune system because they don't have that second signal. The only way they get them is to the tumor and we worked this out in the early 90s. The tumor gets big enough for whatever causes inflammation. The innate immune system comes in. The innate immune system has those things that called B7 for, you know, it can be called Frank. It doesn't matter. I mean, it's just the name means nothing. But they bind to CD28 and that says go. The only way that the immune system was solid tumors and this is that we probably system in the early 90s was when you that they grow until there's tumor cell death and then the innate immune system comes in and primes the T cells and then you start generating T cells. But the thing is you probably got 10 to the 10 to the 9th different, nobody really knows for sure, but different T cells in your body with different receptors. And of course, that means you've only got a few hundred maybe of any given clone and that's not enough to protect you against anything. You need 100 tens of cells. And so you have to have to expand. So that's what this, so the T cell receptor actor sees the, you know, ignition switch and nothing happens really until you push on the CD28 molecule gas pedal. Then they take off. You got to generate a hundred thousand, I mean, hundreds of thousands to millions of cells to swarm through the body and look for things. I mean, it's what's so cool about because then you don't need to know where to cut and know where to shine the radiation or whatever. You don't have to T cells go find it, go find the micrometastases. You know, the little clumps of tumor cell under your toenail or wherever. I mean, that's exaggerating. It's always the same. But anyway, to go find the tumor cells where they are and take them out or at least keep them in control where they don't grow anymore. But that process has to happen fast to the tumor winds. And so, this tumor is going to go very fast generally, yeah. Right. Well, not that fast, it takes years generally. It's at the end when they start damaged. Oh, okay. That the problem, I mean, a lot of tumors could get quite large as long as they don't aren't in a place. I mean, you got a lot more degrees of freedom than a tumor that's in your abdomen than a tumor's in your brain, for example, just the sheer pressure in the brain will kill you. Ready to electrify your drive? Hyundai's cutting edge EV lineup is about to change everything you thought you knew about electric vehicles, prepare to be captivated by a range that's as bold as it is brilliant. From the lightning fast, ionic 5 and ionic 6, charging from 10 to 80% in a mere 18 minutes to the tech pack cabins boasting highway driving assist and blind spot collision warning, Hyundai EVs are redefining the electric experience and with America's best warranty, including a 10 year 100,000 mile limited electric battery warranty, you'll drive with unmatched confidence. Hyundai's EVs aren't just the future. They're the now you've been waiting for. Learn more about Hyundai's EVs at HyundaiUSA.com. Call 5.62-314-46034 complete details. America's best warranty claim based on total package of warranty programs. See dealer for limited warranty details. See your Hyundai dealer for further details and limitations. Is it something where different kinds of cancer are still going to need different kinds of T cells to come to life? About the different. They're basically the same kind of thing. So it's commonality, but it's those myeloid cells again, they get in there because they can interfere in different ways so we can we've got to work on those. Anyway, there's this other molecule called C2L4 which we showed in the early 90s again was a break. So at the end of that expansion phase that C2L4 molecule starts coming up and stops the T cells from providing, they've got to stop or they'll kill you because they just they got to stop. I mean, it's not they don't become a cancer. I mean, it's not like that, but they'll just grow normally and use up all your nutrients. Nothing left for everybody else. So we got to stop that process and that's what this molecule called C2L4 does. And so the thing that we figured out in the early 90s was if you block that molecule you can let the T cells keep going a little bit longer than they would normally long enough to take out the tumor and then you stop the therapy and everything comes back to normal. And so that works, particularly well in some kinds of cancer. Just take it the breaks off for a while. Right. I mean, I know that one of the most terrible things you can hear when you have cancer is that it has spread, right, and spread around the body. So it sounds like maybe this kind of therapy will be more amenable to even dealing with that. Yeah. Melonoma kills you because it, you know, it's up in the liver, the bone or the brain. Jimmy Carter had a melanoma in his brain. Got a metotherapy was cured. There'd be 100 and whatever 100. Oh, okay. He was cured about seven years ago with a metotherapy of brain cancer. So I guess that answers my next question. Like how much is this in the clinic now? Is there a pill that you can take? Is this grow? No, no, it's not. No, it's all over the world. There are millions of people literally that have been treated. In fact, in melanoma now, immunotherapy is pretty much the standard of care. It's the first thing to get because it's so effective. The drug that we developed in the late 90s, epilumumab, it was approved by the FDA in 2011, that's given all over the world. As I said, millions of people have been treated. And it cures overall by itself about 20% of people with metastatic melanoma. To put this in context, melanoma was one of the earliest targets for several reasons. But one of which is no other drug, no drug had ever had any effect at all in melanoma ever. And so when you go over the metotherapy, it also there are some indications that maybe it was immunogenic because there's a lot of mutations. But any event with our drug, 20% of people are cured by one or two injections. And by the therapy, by the way, is you send a chair from about an hour. And there's a drip bottle with a drug in it that's infused in your blood and you go home. And that's it. And that's better than chemotherapy as we know it. Yeah. And with blood, most patients, there's, you know, there's subscribers, there's some diarrhea, there's some stuff, but usually nothing really bad. Occasionally, there can be bad stuff. Even, you know, some patients get top one diabetes, which is not immune conditions. And maybe if they already had it, borderline, it didn't know it. It just makes it worse. But I mean, there's a downside, a lot of patients, but all of a sudden it's tough. Anyway, it was 20%. But then after we started, our stuff started coming out, Tosco, Hanjo in Japan, plus Arlene Sharp and Gordon Freeman at the day before we discovered this other checkpoint. Setele Four was the first checkpoint defined as a cell intrinsic, a molecule on the surface of a T cell itself that helps give a negative signal. Okay. Because T cell receptor obviously is a positive signal, it's the distance switch. CD28 is the gas balance, another positive signal. C2Y forces stop all that stuff. It's time to quit. And so that's the one we chose to focus on. You know, you can either make the other ones better. We chose, let's just take the brakes off. Let's disable the brakes. And it works exactly well. As I said, as a phase one trial, you know, which normally is just safety. Make sure you're not killing anybody and then not trade it up until they start getting really sick and then back off a little bit. And that's the way the cancer therapy used to be. So there you prove it's safety. You find the maximum tolerated dose. You know, how far can you go before you make people sick? I mean, you give that dose and you give it until all the tumors gone. If the tumor grows at all, it's a failure. All of that's out the window with immunotherapies. First of all, there is no maximum tolerated dose usually. People either, I mean, they may have adverse events. But you know, you go up and up and you know, you might get, it gets more frequent in the population, but people don't necessarily get sicker. It's not like there's a poison, poisonous level of it. And with the, in melanoma, in the first 14 patients, phase one, there were three who's tumors completely went away. You know, which was just unheard of at the time, particularly in melanoma, because in 2011, when the phase one, phase three child, sorry, that I was associated with was unblinded and reported to the FDA, at that time, if you were diagnosed with metastatic melanoma, the median survival, 50% of people would be dead in seven months. Fewer than 3% would be alive at five years. After that, it was men's skill. It's not to say that everybody always died, but it was much less than 1%. Yeah. It survived. Now, with just this one drug, 20% are alive at 10 years plus. You know, with no other therapy, just one, one round of therapy, you're done. When Tosca came along with this other molecule called PD1, which works a slightly different way, but the overall picture is similar enough. It's another checkpoint. It works differently. If you put them together, there was just a trial that was just reported about a month ago. There was over 1,000 people randomized 10 different countries. I don't know how many different PIs. I mean, the gold standard clinical trials, 10 years follow up. 55% of the patients were still alive. Wow. So now we went from a cancer, which was almost uniformly fatal in less than five years to we can cure more than 50% of the people with that. That is amazing. But so my immediate reaction is that 20% 50, 55% numbers are on the one hand super impressive. On the other hand, why not 100% what do we got to do? Exactly. That's exactly what we're working on now. How do we get that to 100? Yeah. And unfortunately, I don't want to get it out, but I'm not sure that the drug company seemed to be happy with 55% or so. Yeah. Anyway, it gets harder now. But that is the question, right? I mean, to me, that's why we have this thing called, we have this institute that's been founded in Anderson. Its whole goal is how do we make that better? And the way you make that better, again, is by bringing the myeloid cells in there. What are the ways, what are the things that are really, now we know, for example, there are a lot more of these things called checkpoints. Probably, I mean, there's a small number. It's probably a dozen, maybe. I don't know for sure, but that influenced the immune system in various ways that they regulated. And some of them only pop up when you take one off. And so in one sense, it's whack-a-mole. You take one off and another one. Because the immune system tries to regulate itself. But the biology is wonderful. Just wonderfully complicated and do it all fits together to make sure that everything that could happen, there's a counter-rate to it. Multiple ways of built in. But because it doesn't want to kill you. I mean, there are more ways of turning it in immune response off. And there are turning it off. Simply because the consequences of having it work, but it shouldn't. Or too devastating, particularly if it kills you when you're young. So it's all tuned to do that. But anyway, so one of the cardinal rules in performing drug development is make sure something has a single agent activity before you combine it with something else. That paradigm is shot here because some of those molecules aren't even expressed until you give one of the other ones. And so we've got to get off of that sort of thing and understand it mechanistically. And so that's what we're doing is going into humans as soon as we can. As we know it's safe and giving combinations to get biopsies and seeing what happened. What new molecules came up. Because now we can measure the advances that have been made in biology in terms of being able to do single cell transcriptomics and knowing every gene that's expressed essentially in every protein that's made allows us to really understand what's going on. So if we can get biopsies after treatment, we can begin to unravel all this stuff. So that's what we're doing now. We try to work stuff out in my skin. We get idea works. And then as soon as we can with the help of Paa Sharma who runs our clinical thing, going to patients to a 12-pitch trial, safety and mechanism, not necessarily looking for an anti-tumor effect yet. But just did we at least not hurt the patient and did we learn something about the mechanism? Maybe Vista, his name of another one of these checkpoints. Maybe Vista plays a role. Maybe the next time we need to add Vista to the cocktail. So we go back, we add Vista then. See if that works. So that's the idea. Do this iterative thing. That's how we get it for 55 percent. And do I get, my impression is, or my guess would be that this kind of therapy might also have the benefit that can, you know, thinking of vaccines as an analogy, it sticks around in the body. It might help prevent that's coming next. Yeah, I mean, I think in a way we do ourselves a bit of the service by calling it like the antibody that we made to C2-I-4, it's the drug. It's not the drug. It's the thing that, it's the pro-drug, it's the T cell that's the drug. And so that antibody's gone in a few weeks. T cell's there for the rest of your life. Okay, so we're running to the end of the podcast. So I'll ask one slightly crazier question. Now, all these ideas about networks and switches and non-linearities, I'm a complexity scientist among other things. It just makes me think of the study of complex systems. But is your work and the work of other people trying to do what you do? Is it just so focused on cancer and immunology that you don't have time to... No, I think, no, that's an excellent question. But I think that if we can learn how to reverse this, we could treat autoimmunity. There's increasing evidence that a lot of neurodeginative diseases involve dysfunctions in immune systems. We can really understand what we're doing. We might be able to do something about Alzheimer's down the road or Parkinson's or diseases like that. I mean, we're thinking about that all the time and hoping that some of the data that we have, or just people... I mean, it's the very simplest over some occasions. You just do the opposite of what we're doing now. Maybe we can cure those diseases. So our institute is... Our goal is to use the advances in basic science to advance medical practice. Right now, it's cancer. After we cure cancer, then we'll go after neurologic. Never satisfied. Well, one of the goals of the podcast is to give young, curious people a food for thought about areas that are exciting and changing very rapidly right now. You've certainly done that for us. I think, of course, I'm biased, but I think that it's a wonderful time to be doing this work. And it's become a system's biology problem more and more. And so, single-cellular analytical techniques, the ability to take a slide now to diagnose the cancer. You get a piece of the cancer and you stay in it with hematocsidonias and you get this purplish thing that you could look at shapes. The pathologist could say, that's a cancer. That's not... There's some immune cells over there. Now we can look at that and by doing some different analytical techniques, we can tell you every gene that's expressed in that cell. And what we already know is that the same cell that's here next to the cancer cell is going to be different than... Otherwise, pretty much identical cell over here that's not in contact with the cancer cell. And the immune cell, the same thing. The immune cell that's next to the tumor cell is not going to be like the immune cell that's in the blood. And so now we can start to unravel one of those differences. How can we send the cells down? We know that there are certain inhibitory molecules that the myeloid cells, particularly those that are in these complexes near the tumor cells, express the t-cells off. We can forget how to just turn those molecules off. The myeloid cells, you know, then, you know, we got to know what they are first. I'm bringing that up because I was just discussing with one of my postdocs, two molecules of that sort that we recently found that we're in the process of trying to do that, but as the science is the engineers and the computational people and all that are coming up with all these magical new things, I couldn't even dream of five years ago. I mean, that's how fast it moves. There's stuff we're doing now. That wouldn't even guess they would be doing five years ago. That it's just such a fascinating kind of being biology. And I don't know. My motto is like, I mean, I've always been fascinated in science and biology. You know, just as a, you might as well do something on them. Or even something helps people. Because, you know, I mean, I like, I got into it initially because I just, you know, my family situation on the other hand, it's fun. Yeah. It's rewarding and it helps people too. So I think that, you know, a lot of it's a judgeary too, but, but it's, you know, it's just exposal solving with the tools that we're getting that are coming, you know, from bioengineers and computational people are just allowing us to ask questions that we couldn't even dream about. It's exciting times. Absolutely. Jim Allison, thanks so much for being in the Mindscape podcast. Thank you. By the way, I see you have a guitar. Do you play much? Yeah. That's a, that's a bass guitar that I'm very, very, very bad at. If we had more time or if you want to take another five minutes, I was going to say like, tell us the Willie Nelson story. Come on. It's so good. Oh, I'll tell you one thing. I went, I had a knee replacement last, was it last year? Yeah. Anyway. And really, I play with him occasionally, but he asked me to come to Austin. I'm in Houston, you know, his fourth in July, Pitbix in Austin. So I said, would you come down? I mean, he didn't, but his, his ride for this, his more harmonic players in front of it. So Jim come down, join us. I said, I can't. I just had knee surgery and I don't want to go down there. And I said, well, we just happened to, they were playing in this place called the Woodlands, which is just north of Houston near this lake where I have a lake house. I was recuperating from the surgery there. They said, well, we're going to be there on Saturday night. So why don't you come and play there? We, you know, I said, well, I can't walk very well. I said, well, get a wheelchair. Yeah. That's what you're talking about. So I said, okay, okay. So my son got a wheelchair. We got some friends who went down, wheeled me in and I'm still an edge of the stage. And so I was waiting to play, but I still wasn't sure I could go out there. And one song came by and they said, come out. And I said, no, I can't. I can't stand yet. I was in a wheelchair. I had a cane. Anyway, Willie got into the gospel. He always closes his concerts with a gospel medley. I saw the light with the circle of the appropriate, I'll fly away, you know, all the good old songs. Anyway, so that's so much fun to play. And, you know, he said, you know, Mickey, you know, waves me out there. He had a microphone for me. I said, no, Willie's wife got my husband. Allison, get your ass out. And so, they were, so I jumped up and took a couple of steps before I didn't even think, you know, I just stood up and had a cane, one hand, a harmonica and the other. And I realized, I said, you're going to do because I need both hands when I get out there. So I turned and I threw my crating behind me. And then turned back around and took a couple of steps towards the mic and this woman screamed, he's healed. Willie, you know, the praise the Lord evidence. It was not a double blind study, but it was a day to happen. And then he really starts and I saw the light, you know, it was just so perfect. Congratulations on the recipient of a miracle. It sounds like you deserve to be there. All right. Once again, Jim Allison, thanks very much for being on the Mindscape Podcast. Okay. Bye-bye.
