 If you really want to be interdisciplinary, you want to be a neuroscientist, you want to be a flosser, you have to do those things. You can't just read about them. There is a practical or practice or a praxis-oriented kind of aspect. What happens is scientists prematurely automatize the important ideas and devote all their thinking to lower level methodological trouble. So they stop thinking. The single neuron approach to understanding cognition was really spinning its wheels for the past decade and a half or more. There was seemingly marginal progress on certain issues, but not on these core complicated aspects of cognition. Just on a bet that David and I had, what kind of neuroscience is going to give us the best insights, intuitions, concepts to think about that difference between the cognitive system and the sensual motor system and the argument is... This is Brain Inspired. Welcome everyone, it's Paul. So today I have on David Barock from Columbia University and John Crackauer at Johns Hopkins. Of course, Johns been on the show many times now, but this is David's first time on the podcast. So David is both a philosopher and a neuroscientist and that is one of the things that we discuss in the beginning. His experience is working on both sides there, the philosophy side and the neuroscience side. But the main reason they're on is because of a recent paper they collaborated on called Two Views on the Cognitive Brain. In this paper, they championed the recent population-based dynamical systems approach to studying brains that I've discussed with many others on previous episodes. And David and John argue that this kind of approach gives reason to be optimistic about making real progress, understanding how brain activity underlies higher cognitive functions that have historically resisted explanation. So we talk about some of the issues that they discuss more deeply in the paper. As always, I want to express my gratitude to my Patreon supporters. I'm really grateful that you took the time and made the effort to sign up and essentially donate a couple dollars a month to the podcast. Thank you. Show notes for this episode or at braininspired.co slash podcast slash 113. 113. Enjoy. David, John, thank you for being here. Welcome. Thank you for having us. Pleased to be here. Thank you. Again, Paul, I feel like we're almost a couple. I know this is a record number for you. I think I believe you are the highest most frequent visitor, John. Congratulations or I'm sorry, one of us too. I'm deeply honored. I'm deeply honored. But David, you're first time guest here. So let's focus on you for just a couple of minutes. I kind of want to know about your background, but also how you're managing the philosophy, slash neuroscience world and the social aspect of that. Do all your neuroscience friends hate you? Do all your philosopher friends hate you? Or does everyone love you? Well, love is a strong term here, but I think there is some cross-discipline or respect and I think importantly, that respect has been increasing or is the dialogue channels of communication or opening up and being founded coming on a show like this of course helps encourage those channels of communication as well. So my background was, I went to the Claremont College as actually outside Los Angeles and I had an advisor. I was very into philosophy when I arrived in college and I had an advisor, Brian Keely, a philosopher who has done a little bit of bench work as well in neuroscience who was just a fabulous mentor and turned me on to the intersection. Right, right, almost from day one when I was in college, intersection of neuroscience and philosophy. And at Pitzer College where I went to school, you were able to design your own major and I designed my own major. I called it Conscious in Studies, but it was really philosophy, psychology and neuroscience. And I was tutored, mentored by Brian as well as a psychologist who has passed sadly about 10 years ago now, William Banks at Pomona who is a very close advisor in mine as well, who was very interested in consciousness. And so my undergraduate studies really were already at the intersection of these disciplines, albeit focused on experience, the qualitative nature of consciousness and related aspects of subjectivity and so forth of the mind. Then I graduated from college. I had the, I think not too uncommon experience of what the hell do I do now, especially with a degree in consciousness science or consciousness studies. And I decided to get a more rigorous training in analytic philosophy. And I did that. I got a master's degree in philosophy from Milwaukee. But then realized that I still loved some of the empirical aspects of the study of mind. And by then I had decided to move away from consciousness, which I still find to be very interesting and completely confounding of basically every theory of never seen. A rational decision. A rational decision. Yeah. And especially giving my own intellectual limitations and time and so forth. And so I decided to pursue a fundamental questions in cognition and in cognitive neuroscience. And as well, I matriculated at Duke University where they're only about at the time and there still aren't very many interdisciplinary programs at the graduate level that combine philosophy and the neurosciences. And Duke University had had this wonderful institutional mechanism for fostering interdisciplinary endeavor at the graduate level. They're called graduate meeting programs. And I was in the cognitive neuroscience graduate meeting program. And I was able to matriculate within Duke to the philosophy department my second year for my actual PhD. But I worked in neurobiology and cognitive neuroscience the entire time I was studying for my PhD. So I would, you know, that gives you a little capsule of sort of my background. And it has always been interdisciplinary. So this focus of my research has changed over time. I still, as we're on here today to discuss, I have a focus on the conceptual and theoretical foundations of cognitive neuroscience. But my empirical work and a lot of my conceptual work these days actually has to do with reasoning. What is reasoning? How does reasoning connect to the selective pressures on organisms? And in particular, how does foraging bear on reasoning up to and including formal mathematical reasoning? So I have some papers and progress. And sort of in the long drown out submission process that is philosophy applying principles of foraging to formal mathematical reasoning. And then I also investigate the neural circuits of reasoning from a foraging perspective. So that sort of gives you a flavor for the way that I weave together these diverse disciplines. What are you? Are you a philosopher? Are you a neuroscientist? What do you tell Ant Clotile? I don't know who Ant Clotile is. Oh, man. I am a philosopher and a neuroscientist. So I work in both disciplines. I publish in both disciplines as best I can to the highest standards of each field is extremely challenging. If I'm forced to choose, I don't know. I'm not forced to be a scientist. Yeah, I don't think that's a useful distinction to make in these sorts of terms because they really feed off of each other as the paper we're going to talk about attests to. John, do you have what you have been really, I don't want to say recently diving into it because you've always been into philosophy. Do you have the perfect, the optimal trajectory for circling back, someone like me, who I guess is probably, I don't know, now that I'm not in neuroscience and experimental neuroscience. Now I'm just doing philosophy, it seems, all the time. But the most useful sort of cyclic and duration within the cycles of experimental versus philosophy, et cetera. Yeah. I mean, there are so many things to say here. One I think is philosophers can become quite defensive if they're seen mainly as a kind of like a statistics department or a university a way to clean up people's thinking in whatever discipline they do. That it's a kind of mental hygiene so that people get a little bit of a sense of what they are getting confused over and help them realize the contradictions in their own thoughts. So kind of a thinking consult, right? But of course philosophers don't want to consider themselves just that. They have their own interests, just like statisticians have their own formal interests. They're not there just to do a power analysis for you. Right? So in other words, there's a little bit of that when it comes to philosophy, especially might supply to science. But on that, you know, and then as we, you and I have talked a lot before, you know, how sock chines talked about this idea that the philosophy of science is sort of complementary science. It's thinking about the things that scientists in their daily activities gloss over. Right? It's just filling in the gaps. Right? And another way that I would put it is, you know, I would just did a podcast recently on skill learning. And you know, I made a point that athletes automatize all their lower level stuff that they can devote their cognition to strategies and working out what the opponent's going to do next. In other words, we're worrying so much as amateurs about our backhand that we can't possibly think about what our opponent's doing. So you know, you actually shunt your cognitive, your precious, you know, cognitive resources to higher level problems because everything else has been automatized. The problem I think in science and in neuroscience in particular is that's reversed. What happens is scientists prematurely automatize the important ideas and devote all their thinking to lower level methodological problems. So they stop thinking about the bigger, what's a representation? What's inference? You know, what can reinforcement learning tell us or not tell us? So in a design version, they prematurely shut down thinking about the big complex parts so that they can devote all their cognitive load to modeling, to doing analysis, to looking at data. Do you think that that's because there is such a load cognitively to everything that everyone's doing? So you have to choose, right? Right. So in other words, scientists, and I had been thinking about this only recently, like inverse athletes is that you, the nature of the discipline and the complexity of its methods basically make it very difficult to devote that amount of practice to the actual higher level concepts which are saturating, especially cognitive neuroscience. And so philosophers sometimes can actually have unload that burden a little bit and sort of do some of that thinking that can complement the amount of cognitive load devoted to the techniques, to the math, to the, that stuff. And that's what I think is happening. And the point I would make is that's not going to work. Right? In other words, you're going to have to devote some time to worrying about the higher level problems associated with the assumptions you make before you dive down into the methodology. Johnny, I'm not sure what you're describing is so unusual across the sciences, right? So there's this coony and notion of normal science or typical science or something like this. And I think you might find this kind of division of labor maybe or this division of attention within scientists where oftentimes there is a lot of normal science that occurs and a lot of progress is being made. We shouldn't minimize the work that's being done despite sort of shelving bigger conceptual problems. And maybe cognitive neuroscience in that sense isn't so unique. Maybe it really is a feature of all the sciences to have this kind of focus on the local issues, on the techniques, on the methods and the math, with only the occasional engagement with these bigger issues. Now of course, coon famously said that when you have occasion to deal with these bigger issues, that's when you sort of get revolution. That's when you get paradigm shifts. That's when you have a real change in the disciplinary matrix in the way that the discipline proceeds. And maybe what we're saying is that it's time for that in cognitive neuroscience. But I'm not so sure it's really distinct from other scientific disciplines in that regard. I would just say on that that's true. It's just in cognitive neuroscience. I mean, I've made this point before. We do not have the Oxford Handbook of the Philosophy of the Liver or the Kidney. In other words, cognition in the brain seem to lend themselves to the need to think more than I think it's necessarily the case when you're working out how the kidney concentrates urine. In other words, yes, that's true. And coonian framework can be applied. I'm assuming just as much to liver sciences, brain science. And yet there's this extra thing, which I think is real, which is this mind matter issue, this cognition, the whole framework we've got. So in other words, and the final point I'd like to make about this is I think that scientists, you know, I brother talks about this at SFI, you know, that scientists are actually quite rare in the science domain. You've got a lot of ancillary professions, you know, statisticians, programmers, engineers, a lot of professions that are creeped around this whole domain. But actual scientists, people who are worrying in this more fuzzy, global, less local way, is increasingly rare, right? And I think I've spoken to you about before, you know, when you read all of the saxes, little essay on Darwin coming back from his travels and worrying about the sex of plants, it just exudes a kind of scientific curiosity and creativity that we simply do not promote in current science. And I think that philosophy in a way can be a counterbalance to that tendency if used properly. Well, one of the motivations for my question is that I, I think like a lot of people, you know, become, became disillusioned with the specialties that I was learning. And of course, you have to do a very deep dive and learn a very specific skill set to become an expert at anything. But this is antithetical to the overall drive to be a Renaissance person, we'll say person these days, Renaissance person, which is what may be maps onto what you're calling a scientist, John. And so that's what I'm wondering. I mean, my question was about neuroscience and philosophy specifically, but of course, then you have to have circle back around and learn more mathematics and you have to circle back around and learn all sorts of different topics. And what is the right path to maximize the probability of becoming the Renaissance person that you want to be, right? To be most efficient. Could I give one more analogy to that, Paul? When I'm teaching medical students or residents on the wards, for example, and you see a patient, I tell them that you should peg your reading to what you just saw. So you just saw a patient with hemiparacist. Now is the time to read about motor cortex. If you have a patient with a headache, now is the time to read about headaches. So you've just in time learning is another. Well, yes. In other words, create your memory palace around a particular instantiation. And so if you develop, let's say, in the broader sense, that's an intellectual stance that you sort of read around in a vent, you worry. The word I use is learn to worry about what you're seeing and what you're thinking and what you're assuming. And take that worry to question what has been said about hemiparacist and headaches. Are there strange characteristics of this patient that don't fit into the existing framework? And so if you want to be optimal with respect to reading, yes, you can read some seminal texts like Koons book, for example, obviously. But really what you should do is just get into the habit of reading around in the philosophical literature and others when you come across your particular worries as you travel as a scientist and on your particular trajectory. And I think that's what is lacking is that intellectual stance to read around your subject as you go. See, so now one of the most joyous things about my retired condition is that I can do that. I can afford to do that. David, you're more freshly like me. You're kind of more freshly out of, so John's, I think in his late 70s, early, I don't know. I can't remember. That's accurate. Yes. He's ancient, I think, is the, yeah. Anyway, he's a little more removed from, like, let's say, graduate school, right? Then you and I are. Is that even possible at the graduate level, for instance, do you think? I mean, and maybe I'm asking the wrong person because you seem to have superhuman strength to, to be involved in both philosophy and neuroscience in very productive ways. And I don't know how possible is that? Yeah. I think it is very challenging as a general statement. And it does require certain kind of commitment. And it is a sacrifice. We all have finite amounts of time. We have to allocate that time according to our interests. When one does true interdisciplinary work, you need to have the expert foundations in each discipline and allowing, you have to allocate time to build that expertise base. And so it does take a time commitment. And that time commitment takes away from doing things that are kind of essential to the business of academia, like publishing and, and, and, and the like. It also, by the way, incurs a personal cost. So I took, you know, time that I devoted to my intellectual pursuits in multiple disciplines that I could have spent, for example, devoting to social concerns. And so, so there is a cost to doing this kind of disciplinary interdisciplinary expertise building. This kind of comes back to what John was talking about also with tending to prematurely automate our comfort level with some concepts and notions, right? But this is what I want. One of the most beneficial things that you can do is come to the place where it is automated where you don't, where it doesn't, the, some concept, let's say inference, you're reading, and you read the word inference, where that concept does not provide friction and slow you down and make you have to think, right? Writing in your system to type to type thinking process, your executive functioning processes, you want to be able to have that automated so that then you can use that and it just brings into the fore and continues in the stream of your thought. I don't know if I had a question for that, but maybe just asking you, John, if you think, you know, because that is kind of the goal of being a Renaissance person, right? And you, but you see this as antithetical to what's actually happening in science. I guess that's a question. Yeah, I mean, I think one has to distinguish a little bit between, you know, Renaissance person really means a number of sort of interlocking things. One is sort of this polymathic implication, right? Yeah. The last person to know everything, right? The other one is to, but to realize that there is a great benefit to being interested in the humanities if you're a scientist and vice versa, right? And the third is just a particular, as I said before, intellectual, critical stance that you take with respect to everything that you do. And they're not unrelated in so much that you're more likely in my view to take a critical stance if you happen to be curious in a, across a number of domains, right? So I'm always struck, you know, by reading in the Times Literary Supplement a very cogent, quite short book review that seems to be far more analytical, critical than most scientific papers that I read, right? That there's ability to pray see, to be cogent, to construct an argument, you know, it's just not taught as well in science as it is in humanity, right? I mean, that's the irony of all this. Is a critical thinking is taught better in the humanities than it is in science? And you know, that's a conversation we can have. So I think that if you want to have a curiosity, worrying, doubting stance towards your science, then the humanities help because in the methodologies, that's not present, right? There's a lot more certainty enclosure in methodologies. You either know how to do this or you don't, okay? And that expertise can fool you into thinking you can be an expert at science. I don't mind being called a stroke expert. I am a stroke expert. But if someone says to me, you're a neuroscience expert, that seems very odd to me. I don't feel like an expert at all, right? I feel like somebody who's just worrying and trying to, you know, understand things. So it just seems to me that you wouldn't call a novelist an expert novelist. It just has to be odd to say something like that. So I think it's just a difference in the stance, right, which I think is the most useful notion of the Renaissance perspective. But I do want to add to that the cultivation of the critical eye can occur even just the reading literature. So I make a point to read a lot for fun as well. I enjoy reading. And I have found that my creativity and my analysis and so forth are benefit greatly from these more creative kinds of works of art from reading. I completely agree. I think I completely agree. And there is some work on this. Is it reading novels? Is a real way to do better science? Or does that sound? Richard Rorty in his best book, I think, talked about this. From another perspective, you know, how to be an ethical thinker, read novels, right? And he had a brilliant essay on Nabokov where he talks about this. So but I think it's more that than trying to just go through an enormous pile of must-read books out of context. That's almost impossible. John, I wanted to ask you this. I don't think I've ever asked you this. And for fear that it's going to take up too much time, it doesn't matter. I'm going to ask you anyway. And David, I'll ask you the same sort of question in a different way. John, I'm wondering what your medical training, how you think it has interacted or benefited you, or giving you an edge or a different cut that maybe you, I don't know if you see something missing in other neuroscientists or whatever that, you know, that your medical training has helped you with. I mean, do you think that it has helped you or even hindered you, but your medical training? It's actually really interesting question. I actually was at a meeting at SFI about a year and a half ago where David, my brother David, actually mentioned that. And I thought about it a lot recently. I do think that especially doing stroke neurology where you see the effects of modularity in the extreme, right, has definitely given me an advantage. You know, I hear people talk about embodiment and, you know, the inactive is mind and talking about there's no such thing as specialized areas of the brain and all this kind of nonsense quite frankly. And I think that is extremely grounding to spend 25 years looking after neurology patients. And I used to talk to this actually, took with Oliver Sachs, who I knew. And we would talk about this so people who had opinions about how the brain works or about cognition, who never, ever had any experience looking at what happens when cognition goes wrong or what happens when particular parts of the brain are affected. And so I think it leads to a kind of denial of the fact that the brain is where the action is for the most part, especially when it comes to cognition and this notion of modularity. So I would say that I found it increasingly grounding. And when you read someone like Tim Schallus and the work that he's done beautifully talking about, you know, neuropsychology and what the lesion approach has taught us about the brain and how neuro recordings has not done in my opinion as good a job as lesions have so far. Right. It's actually fascinating that lesions seem to do something heftier in terms of what you see than interpreting recordings from the healthy brain. And Schallus writes very beautifully about this is can we substitute the lesion-based pathology approach with the healthy recording approach? And in my view, and actually he mentions this, it doesn't cut nature to its joints so far as well. Yeah, but John, you and I, of course, in our paper, we make the argument that it depends on what you mean by sort of single neuron recording or brain recording. Oh, yes. I mean, just to say that to get on to the paper, I would say that it may well be that we're entering an era where neural recordings of some kind in healthy brains can begin to give the massive amount of insight that lesions provide. So to answer your question, because I've seen so many behavioral consequences of lesions consistently, by the way, it's not idiosyncratic and done a lot of experiments in patients, whether it's cerebellarate, taxi or Parkinson's disease, stroke. Yes, and I don't mean this in a modest way. It gives me a huge advantage, actually. I really do believe that. And I've thought that more. And, you know, and David was when he said to me, completely, you know, in this meeting, he said, John, it's interesting that when people say things, you come up with a patient example, which is incredibly undermining each time people make a certain statement. He says, you know, I have no axe to grind. I don't want to agree with you, but I find it really interesting that they'll say something quite ethereal and abstract. And then you'll talk about dissociations in patients. And it's kind of devastating, right? It's something you're going to have to deal with. It's concrete. Yes. Yeah. So, you see it as a long-term investment more than a cost. I absolutely do. I mean, obviously, as David said, you know, could one of spent, you know, time coding or becoming better computationally, yes. You know, it is in the end of zero-sum game. But I think that if you want to be conceptually deep and worried, I think you have to look very carefully at what's in front of you. David, I don't want to, if you have something to add to that, you can, I was also just going to ask you if you think that your philosophical training has given you an edge in the nature of that edge, if so. Yeah. I think it has, in the sense that I'm able much better to synthesize results. It's a very important aspect of full software, because bringing things together and comparing ideas and concepts and views. So I think it has had a very tangible benefit in that regard. And then I think to go back to something that John was talking about earlier, it's had a real impact in my willingness to just not believe what I'm reading and to really question interpretations of data. So as my neuroscientific training proceeded, I went from reading the entirety of journal articles, sort of puzzling through everything, to focusing on intro and discussion, to a much more mature position where I focus on methods and results, and being very skeptical of interpretive action in these papers, interpretive writing, which oftentimes is in the introduction and discussion. And so, and that has come about, I think, because I'm much more willing to say that keep using this term used inference earlier, it is not easy to define what an inference is. It's one of those funny terms that get thrown around that can mean a lot of different things to a lot of different people. So that's a good example where that might occur in a paper, for example, on basing coding and the brain, visual cortex, let's say, and we'll talk about inference. And I'll say, I don't really buy this story because this is a term, it's really a filler term that it can take on different meanings for different readers. And I think I'm much more willing to call that out in my own reading and my own annotations and what I'm reading and to sort of deconstruct positions and to try and dig down and say, how much of what they're saying really turns on this funny notion here that's not well defined. And then the next step then is, okay, what are they actually doing? What are they actually fine? And that's where you get this focus on methods and results. And then you can say, okay, here's the tangible output from this study. Here's their interpretation, but it has all these conceptual issues. And of course, John and I are of the opinion that there has been a recent flowering of conceptual issues and it pays to pay attention to some of them. That is a great segue. I believe to talk about the paper, which is a, let's see, how do I introduce this paper? So I would say that the paper is a very high dimensional foray into these concepts. So therefore, I'm going to give my lowest dimensional possible summary of it, which is completely unfair and then we can go from there. But I'll give, so my lowest dimensional summary of the paper is that it is yay for dynamical systems theory approach. And let's detach function, mental properties, nearly from structure and the low level circuitry of the neuroscience. I just went high dimensional there. Let me, I'm going to go, I'm going to stick with low dimensional, yay for dynamical systems theory approach. How is that too low dimensional? I think that's not a bad catch phrase slogan as it were. I think there is, there are some fine issues here that we need to pay attention to. You said in your initial more high dimensional recapitulation that it's against structure but for dynamics. But I actually think that structure is one of these funny terms and there's sort of the structure of neurons or the structure of networks. But there's also dynamical structure, there are state spaces, there's features of the way that systems move through those state spaces and that deserves to be called structure. And actually there's big debates in philosophy about what exactly is structure and material structure, what does it mean? This raises some issues about can you actually cash out this difference between the dynamics of things and their material properties and I could sort of fall on the side of not really any time you measure anything, you're registering a change for example or no change which is a certain kind of change. And that Bertrand Russell made the point that we don't really know what the sort of intrinsic properties of matter are. We only know the properties of matter and so far as matter can impinge upon other matter or has other effects. And as a result it's not clear that there really is a substantial sense in which you can distinguish between structure and dynamics. And so I think for those two reasons there's dynamical structure as well as the fact that what we typically think of as material properties really do reflect dynamics or changes or something of that nature that the distinction doesn't have a good grounding. Yeah see that was very high dimensional what you just said and I think that that's unavoidable right. And so this paper is because of the if it's high dimensionality because it's of its synthesis and drawing on a lot of philosophy and drawing on really heavy concepts that are unfinished business and you guys operationalize terms and define terms as you go but keeping those out your particular definitions and conceptions in mind while you go it is a slow going affair and there's what's the what are the kids say it's it's a lot that's what the kids say these days right isn't that the phrase it's a lot yeah so just to like zoom zoom way out what would you say and you know you can both time in here and I should be a better host and ask one of you specifically but it's a discussion so what would you say is the take home claim from from the paper. Well I'll just go quicker because I know David you know we'll have more to say it for then is I think there are a number of things first of all just to finish the conversation just how I do think it's important to distinguish between sort of population doctrine ideas. In other words you don't have to invoke dynamics per say to be able to derive interesting properties from populations just like you can from neurons and of course there's dynamics in single neuron data that's what the peristimidus time histogram is right so you know I think it's important to absolutely accept that there's a very important role for considering dynamics and trajectories in population level analyses but not to conflate them okay in other words that's one thing the the the points are if we're going to worry about thinking cognition and you have to say that there's something different between thinking and moving and that there's something about the neuroscience of moving that isn't going to easily extrapolate to the neuroscience of thinking and that one's going to have to you know from the outside and in well what is thinking you know as David said what kind of representations does one have to info when has to talk about intentionality when has to talk about models of the world that are detachable from a stimulus in other words one has to think more about what sets cognition and thinking apart from the sensory motor system and actually to your point about me seeing stroke patients I can tell you that I see un coupling of those systems all the time the best example is when the diving bell in the butterfly was written by the editor French L Dominique Bobie where he had a pontine hemorrhage and was locked in and wrote an entire book right now he couldn't move at all right but he could write an incredibly beautiful book okay and all I'm saying is whatever we end up understanding about how he wrote that book it's going to require some extra thinking from how he lost his ability to move all right so that's the first thing is except that there's a there's something about canemons system two versus canemons system one which I will flagantly say a lot of movement to system one thinking a system two so that which we start with and then go okay based on a bet that David and I had what kind of neuroscience is going to give us the best insights intuitions concepts to think about that difference between the cognitive system and the sensory motor system and the argument is that the hot field in view this idea of population level phenomena right which have dynamics are going to be the best way in to this particular puzzle when it comes to cognition so it was really that and then to say that the chirointone approach which seemed to work very well as chirointin used it in the solus muscle of the deserabra catch to study the stretch reflex isn't necessarily going to be as fruitful as a first level explainer when it comes to these cognitive attributes that we talk about so it's really that what is thinking does cognition deserve extra features and then what kind of neuroscience is going to help us have a feedback loop between the behavioral data and the neural data and that's what this paper is really about so I think that it would be so I'm going to diverge from John here so I don't think that the distinction that we're talking about is really driven by system one versus system two whatever it's incredible marriage may be whatever it's hypothetical status maybe I think that there's habitual cognition that requires sophisticated manipulation of representations in as full blooded as senses you want so I think that would be system one cognition full four cognition I think there can be system two that is non-representational and so I do think that the cognition that the system system two distinction is orthogonal to sort of what we were trying to pick up on and I think it is the existence of certain cognitive faculties in our ability to flexibly manipulate representations that is the driving question behind our study and I think what our study are our paper and I think what we argue is that in order to address these sophisticated cognitive faculties we really do need these new resources these new concepts these this new way of thinking about brain data to address I would I mean it just to be clear I disagree with that view in other words I think that once you what I do agree with is you can have a lot of system one cognition I thought the whole book was about right in other words you know you cross the street as a white person when a person of colors walking towards you that is a system one cognitive mistake but it's no longer representation in my view it's just a cached non-representational policy that you now have a racist policy and I actually think that it's only useful to think about representations when you overtly deliberately consult them and use them rather than just now trick of them like any other. Yeah but I think that cognition is a type of internal behavior and I think the values that embody our aims and our goals during inquiry can augment and change the direction in which our cognition unfolds even to the deepest level even to inference even to the sequences of mental states that are purportedly logically connected as a result of one mental state seemingly supporting another that is a completely value-based kind of internal sort of behavior that can be completely unconscious so there's bias not just an action but an inference and thought pattern and I see no other way but to suppose that that is representationally driven so that's why I have that view but John I don't think you and I have ever debated system one versus system two so this is interesting enough. That's absolutely true I think that what I'm saying is that and it is somewhat orthogonal that I think that if to the degree that we are worrying about cognition I think we're worrying about something where you're overtly you know it's intentional you're consulting a model of the world I do think that you can have intelligent reflexes all the way up into cognition and it's interesting to me that whether you know a reflex way of striking your backhand or reflex way of thinking about something I'm not so sure that they're that different but where I do think they're different is when you start getting into this overt intentional use of a representation but it may not matter hugely to this debate but my guess is that there is a difference between a cognitive reflex and an overt deliberative process. This is an interesting distinction I mean I don't know if you want to go down the backhand essentially example to talk about this but you know it makes me think of going back to our automating right automating when we're talking about learning science and prematurely automating concepts and the difference when you're doing a backhand in flow state versus doing a backhand when you are intentionally thinking about it and it screws up your backhand right so is this an area where and I may be getting way too far ahead of ourselves here is this an area where representational thinking what you guys would posit as representational thinking crosses over and affects the cognitive reflex type thinking does that make sense does that question make sense first of all. So I think representation could I mean maybe this is more of the disagree move of change on that but I think representation can play a role even in this sophisticated backhand as opposed to when you're learning how to do a backhand. Let's for the listeners let's just define representation the way that you guys define it in the paper here okay what do you mean when you say representation right so representation is an internal state of the system that has content it's about something that helps to guide behavior carries information about that something in the world but has more sophisticated properties than just those two carrying information and guide behavior in addition for example representations oftentimes can be can occur in the system even in the absence of things that typically cause them that's this detachability property that we mentioned earlier and there's other properties that they have as well for example oftentimes in philosophy representations are thought to be able to be true or false or valuable in some sense accurate or inaccurate and so that's another more sophisticated property representation than the term or the concept is typically thought to imply especially as it's used in much of censoring modern neuroscience so when we talk about representation we're not just talking about any internal state of the system that helps immediate behavior and can carry information about the external world in addition we're talking about these more sophisticated internal states that can be manipulated inside the system that are about things in the external world that can be evaluated for truth or falsehood or other types of properties they can be accurate or interactive and that can occur in the absence of their typical stimulus typically so so this is a more sophisticated sense it's much more philosophical of a notion of representation than typically occurs in discussions in neuroscience but we think it's necessary in order to tackle these really sophisticated cognitive phenomena for instance an example I like to use has to do with planning a vacation and planning a vacation oftentimes requires for example making a purchasing a plane ticket and you have a representation of a plane in your mind when you're planning this vacation but there's no plane in your environment right now that's causing that representation so there's some internal process that causes that representation even though you're not in the presence of planes and of course there's a million examples of this type that we can use you can think about things that don't exist and so on and so forth so there's a lot of sophisticated cognitive activity that goes on that requires this kind of internal action computation over internal structures in order to explain by the way this more sophisticated notion of representation that we talk about in the paper has caused no end of controversy when we've presented this material and and and lots of furious debate I mean so it's actually a very good example this is very important here of where the philosophers and neuroscientists confuse each other yeah okay see that it's actually very interesting that I mean let me just give another example that I can think help if you walk into your front door and you walk to your kitchen okay you just do it but if I asked you Paul right now tell me how many left turns you take when you walk in the front door of your house to get to your kitchen right now you're going to have to use a representation right you're going to have to think about the out your house you're going to have to imagine yourself walking through it and you're going to have to answer you're going to have to do a computation on that representation which is count the number of left turn actually to simulate it yeah you're going to have to simulate it whereas that's not the case when you walk into your house and go to the kitchen you've cashed what you do you use cues you don't have to use a representation like that that is a vast difference okay and that is what this is about now it's very interesting that philosophers who have tried to naturalize their views of representation and stick to the neuroscience what they do in most cases and there are exceptions is they strip the interesting aspect of representation this simulation down to impoverished anemic version of the representation which is a state that maps isomorphically onto some aspect of the environment okay neuroscientists also have that impoverished view right it's just some correlation ultimately right so it's very important to realize interestingly that in an attempt to get into the neural data the interesting aspect of representation which is this full blown simulation that you effortlessly can do which we haven't the slightest idea how that happens by the way no clue right but we want to have a clue and again what this paper is about is perhaps that ability for you to simulate in your head the number that your house and then do a computation of that representation the number of left turns right that's what we want to understand and the bet we're making is that you're going to have to have a hot field in population level notion of it but let's just understand that the normity of the problem and that we don't have a clue okay and that's what we have to admit and is it fair to say that the modern dynamical manifold type computational approach is you would argue is our best bet toward a brain-based explanation of how higher level representations occur at yes but just to be clear right I mean a lot of the nice work that's been done on population level calculations and dynamical systems have been done in motor cortex right by Mark Churchill and Sean where in fact they're correct to astute the notion of representation otherwise they're correct to say that you don't need to invoke the notion of representation in that particular incarnation of a dynamical systems view and a population level view that's an extremely important point to make is not every population level analysis and trajectories and manifolds and subspaces implies representation of the kind that we think you're going to have to invoke for thinking it just may well be that some version of that in the prefrontal cortex will do the requisite job but one has to this is just a stepping stone it's not as though that this level of analysis is of field you view is inherently representation in the way that we want far from it it's just that it's the we just have a feeling that that's going to be the form of the neural data which will get us there it's a bet in we're making an empirical bet that this way of viewing neural activity is going to be the way that explains representations explains the manipulation of representations that gives rise to intelligent behavior an interesting aspect of this is that this is this has been going on for you know well it's increased in publications for instance right this mode of analysis but it's sort of the it has the the high dimensional the high number of neural populations population recordings has naturally linked itself to this type of analysis that has not been going on for over a decade and I'm wondering what so so now I mean so you're satisfied that this is the type of of technology and recordings that will all of a sudden now that we have this modern technology that lends itself to these kinds of analyses now it's a more satisfying account of I'm not I'm not articulating it well it seems convenient let's say to to say now we have this is the best modern data and analysis that we have and it's better right and and so that that's why you know my initials summary of yay for the dynamical systems theory approach is it's kind of like saying yay we're doing well we're progressing and I and I'm wondering what the where the big step is it just one thing quick just one thing I mean it's just so important I mean a lot of people in the dynamical systems view were anti-representational okay so I think it's dangerous in this discussion to you know and so are the original papers by Mark and Krishna right they explicitly say in their papers that these are non-representational so it's extremely important to not confuse sort of the way to map the neural data onto these behavioral concepts and and and and just to call it dynamics I'm just worried because it's just there is a component of dynamics when you basically have transitions between states but it's not an anti-representational stance that we're taking it on the contrary right so in the history of dynamical systems is from the beginnings you know from thank elder was was anti-representational yes and that is just etc and let me just be very clear so I later to me if you want to do cognition and you don't have a representational stance it's a non-starter in my view yeah it's just a non-starter I think David agrees um but that doesn't mean and I just think a lot of people are beginning to think that when it comes to cognition and the kind of representations that cognition implies that doing interesting work with the ability to record from many neurons and the ability to do new forms of analysis on that is an interesting segue and a way in to try and to understand this form of representation um it's but it's as David said it's a bet but I think many other people are saying this it's not just us I think people are beginning to think that this is the way to intuit how these representations are computed over by having some neural data to look at it's it's just a bet that it's going to give us insight but I'll add that you know it's the case that if I might be a little philosophy of science put my clusters cap on that the single neuron approach to understanding cognition was really spinning its wheels for the past decade and a half or more uh there was marginal seemingly marginal progress on certain issues but not on these core complicated aspects of cognition furthermore the single neuron data that was being collected presented this bewildering array of responses that didn't meet an easy story along the lines of previous sorts of single neuron stories what we call the sharing tonian view in the paper so what you have is not just this fortuitous development of new techniques and for recording many neurons new methods to analyze these uh uh many neuron recordings but you have in the traditional complement of techniques uh something like a crisis state where you're not making the kind of progress you would hope despite the huge sums of money and and large data sets that were being collected and I'll also add that this new kind of approach this new way of thinking about the brain of analyzing many neuron uh many single neuron recordings where you have many neurons collected at the same time to get some a better snapshot of the population has been productive especially in the past five or 10 years not just for representation questions that have to do with representation and cognition as John pointed out even in motor cortex has been tremendously fruitful so you have on the one hand a relatively stagnant research program that uses these older techniques and has a commitment to a sharing tonian style explanation where you're detailing individual neurons and the connections between them and what each individual neuron is doing I've heard it described as as sort of like this anecdotal neuroscience where each neuron has a little tail to tell about what it does to one where you have many neurons are being recorded that have produced a novel insight into a range of of of cognitive as well as non cognitive neural functions so I think and that's productive so unlike this adherence to this more old-fashioned view there has been a productive research program and and and that to me says not just that this is the new thing in town but this is sort of what the doctor ordered that we really did need these kinds of techniques and methods in order to make progress and that's very exciting I mean this is this is actually really good news and I'll add as sort of by way of Coda here that it is not just confirming these models that we have from other disciplines either it's really providing novel insight into how the brain is able to give rise to the intelligent behavior that's truly representational and cognitive can you give a concrete example of that of a novel insight yeah so a lot of the recent research and publications that are coming out that have to do with this kind of new hot-fueling view we're looking at neural populations in your looking at how the system traverses through that state space have provided insight into more complex representations in the brain a law and and one of the main explanatory concepts is this notion of a manifold so that it's not like when you look at these population activity any of thousands of neurons let's say they're being recorded that the system occupies any point in this huge space of possibilities instead the system tends to occupy points that are on what's called a manifold sort of a restricted subset a very restricted subset of the possible positions in that space and it's those subsets are manifolds that carry seem to carry these kinds of representational contents and there's there's nothing about any theories in psychology or or or cognitive science that say you have to use manifolds or anything like this but the brain does use manifold so I like to think of I like to conceptualize this kind of insight as a novel contribution I'll add in addition that there are ways of reading out where the system lies in these restricted sub spaces on these manifolds that is also providing a novel insight into cognition so I I love this one paper it's a beautiful paper from the Jezeiri lab at MIT it's from Sone et al and the journal neuron from 2019 where they were investigating how the brain is able to keep track of and recreate and intervals of time so the animals have to wait through an interval of time and then when they're signaled to recreate it they kind of have to forgo moving they have to inhibit their movements until they think an equal amount of time has elapsed at which time they respond and in addition to these kinds of manifolds that I was describing as representing the interval of time the readout of where the system is on that curve sort of low dimensional structure that manifold actually seems to inform how the system recreates that interval and it does it by determining how fast the system traverses through another state space in the subsequent epic where the animal in the subsequent period of time where the animal has to indicate how long they thought the interval of time was and that they call this neural speed so label and but there's again there's no theories in psychology about time estimation or response times that appeal to neural speed or traject speed of neural trajectories so there you have an internal variable that seems to explain this relatively sophisticated maybe not fully representational in the sense that John and I have been using but more sophisticated than other types of tasks cognitive function that doesn't appeal that really does give us novel insight into what the brain is doing so that's sort of the example I like to use and and we think that's the right step this is the way that we're going to need to explain more sophisticated more complicated cognitive functions and and also a number of things you know here I am at the scientific institute I mean you know physicists have no problem whatsoever with the notion of emergence neuroscientists stupidly in my view always assume that emergence means this spooky version which no serious physicist believes in so in other words this is just a need for education on the part of neuroscientists the point is that we've known there's a physicist actually here this kind of institute says you know the 20th century biggest achievement was to realize that the physics of individual objects and the physics of interaction between objects are different disciplines they are okay and they require very different frameworks to understand and if you think therefore that you get emergent properties from the interaction between neurons that are connected and that that and it's very interesting what David said when he said use that representation in other words it's very important that the nervous system from the inside is using that simplified subspace to do work it's not just us epistemologically as scientists from the outside just simplifying things for our sake and this is not a new concept computer scientists have known this for a long time that in a high an hierarchical system you omit details so that you can do control with a simpler object right not the computer scientist emits not the computer scientist the computer does that okay so in other words once you take this notion of emergence and interactions which generate objects which are the control objects for a hierarchical system and the physicists have known this and the computer science have known this for ages it's not that new a concept merdaad actually you know i agree completely with with uh David and i think it convinced me that there was a clue and intuition that could be given by looking at these intervals in this state space um merdaad himself in one of his articles talks about the fact that if you want to understand how a clock works and you want to actually design a clock so it works for itself you need to have things like cogs and springs these emergently shaped objects that you construct a clock with you don't talk about the atoms that make up the springs or the cogs that will be a very strange way to design a clock so he merdaad himself makes that point that these are not just a epistemological objects to explain how a clock works to your friend this is the type of object that you need to construct a clock so that it works and all we're saying is that aggregate emergent properties lead to ontological objects which the system uses from the inside and that is not something that is news to people outside of neuroscience so the so the low dimensional manifold type objects the neurodynamical objects that you're talking about another word i don't think that you've used this word yet in talking about it is constrained to do do you can which is important in hierarchical systems as well what i want to ask about is the independence of these higher level representation dynamical objects versus lower level single circuit circuit more closely associated with reflexes and motor actions and where that line is and the reason why i brought up constraints is i'm wondering if you see the lower dimensional manifold type structures as a constraint with which to do computation within the rest of the population of neurons etc i'll start with the constraint part of that question because i think that's absolutely correct i think what's going on here is that these low dimensional manifolds do constrain how the population evolves over time and and some soo can computations that are performed they are in one part of states of their state space and they transform either move somewhere else in that state space or they get transformed into another state space but it's in a way that's best explained by the constraints that are imposed by residing in these low dimensional structures in the high dimensional space so i think that's entirely an accurate description of how computation proceeds in in the cognitive brain now the first question had to do with the relationship between the independence of like so if where is there a clean break between the higher level representation you know and how the and then i'll just throw in how does the meaning get in there how does the intention the aboutness right as i say the relation between the single units and let's say these population level structures are these are these more sophisticated structures so what you meant i mean i had two questions there one was you are asking about the relationship between single neurons and populations or you're asking about the the independence between cognitive representations and sensory motor ones which one are really the end of the scene what i'm so i'm avoiding the sharing tonian and hot field in labels you may notice i don't don't find them useful so i'm avoiding them because i find them to be more frictiony than anything else but but that's what i'm kind of wondering is like where the where the you know what is the nature of the independence between these types of computing let's say so i think it's going to depend partly on what you're trying to explain here so if you are engaged in an understanding of the reflex it's entirely okay to restrict consideration to these kinds of sensory motor nodes and connections sort of representations i think there's great explanatory benefit as you sort of get deeper and deeper sort of speak into the cognitive as you are considering more sophisticated sorts of representations then you're going to start needing to appeal to these more sophisticated neural structures do we do we know where that line is i don't i so i have had this question posted me before i'm of the opinion i'm not sure what john's opinion is but i'm of the opinion that it's not clear there really is a line i think there's going to be gradations of cognitive function that are going to sort of there's a spectrum and some cognitive functions imagination narration planning they may require actually planning it seems like maybe it doesn't require such sophisticated things i think it depends on the type of planning but no but there are going to be these more sophisticated cognitive functions that are going to require these more sophisticated types of explanation in terms of neural spaces of dynamical objects in the brain and there will be less sophisticated instances of cognition but what you what you guys argue for a clean break though so that you can have these mental thoughts that are separated from your more motor sensory systems there that's why i'm asking about the independence right so what you just said is that there's a gradation potentially but what you are going for in the paper i believe is a clean break between them so that you can have these higher level mental properties i may totally be misunderstanding though i i just want to be you know there are many things being slightly complicated here yeah absolutely i absolutely do think that there is and you know and i think you know this has come up a lot in in linguistics you know i think tom scott phillips has written beautifully about this which is that there is a difference between language and communication not a gradation a difference okay and a lot of people get confused in other words the gradation argument can get us into a lot of trouble and that gradation argument comes from both evolution you know because you have to think right there's sort of modification in on a continuum and it also comes from the fact that in the end it's all made out of the same stuff right in other words prefrontal cortex and motor cortex are made up of very similar elements and therefore how could it be that there's this qualitative difference in what we think the representations are for cognition versus what they are for motor and yet in the end whether you have an evolutionary argument or stuff argument there's a continuum again no one in physics has any problem with this at all right they talk about phase transitions they understand qualitative differences yeah but so my point wasn't about gradation in the in the nature of representation it was about gradation in the nature of the cognitive functions and which properties your representations need to have are going to be conditioned unrelative to the cognitive function that you're describing but I do think there's a you know there's wonderful you know I I use this in the book I wrote three years ago about what Sherrington interesting me enough noticed in his chimpanzee that he gave a big sensory motor ablation to and he beautifully describes in a paragraph in that paper from 1917 the huge uncoupling between the cognition the desires the plans the intentionality of the chimpanzee and its consistent surprise that it had all these intentions and then it's arm wouldn't move here right and he actually points out that you've completely uncoupled this non-cognitive system from a cognitive system and you see it all the time in patients right a praxia patients cannot imitate or use tools properly but their mistakes are perfectly executed yeah so the right they're independent I mean the fact of matter is that they can be completely independent if that's the if that's the question then there's no question that you can have ablation of sensory motor representations but maintain your cognitive ones absolutely um I know that behaviorally they can be independent what I'm wondering about is like within these neurodynamical objects right where where the where is where does it but can start becoming useful to talk about um manifolds right to talk about lower dimensional um representations as useful tools for thinking about higher mental properties because in the end I mean the vision is right that we can and correct me please uh because I'm sure I'm wrong the vision what I what I gather from the paper the vision is to have little uh uh little shapes little trophy shapes that we can put up on a shelf and point to and say uh that's worrying that Timmy's gonna fall down the well that's what that looks like right uh on a cloudy day or something and and then you have like all these different shapes and I'm sorry this is a very simplified example but I'm just trying to make it really concrete that then you can look and say look that's the way that that that looks in manifold space yeah so uh I'll say that you know worrying that Timmy's gonna fall down the well it's gonna look like a lot like worrying that you know uh Brenda is gonna fall down the well so you have this sort of swapping out for a representational content but they're gonna lie along these manifolds and you'll just be in a different position along the same manifold but it's gonna be dramatically different sort of neuro functional space from hoping that uh you know the it will rain tomorrow hoping the Donald falls down the well let's say Donald don't know just tell you you're going for a different orthogonal yeah never mind yeah yeah I was going for something sure uh but it's a different attitude hoping is gonna involve uh different computations of those representations and so you'll have a different transformation you're gonna have different manifolds and so forth um this idea of so when is it useful to talk about these hoppulean spaces I think that just depends on what you're studying so if you're studying and and and let me be clear about this when you're studying hoping that uh it's going to rain tomorrow you're not thinking about things that are happening in your immediate sensory motor environment and so you are not gonna get any explanatory purchase um uh if if that's your explanatory goal that's the thing you're trying to explain is how I can hope for future events it doesn't help to pay attention to what's going on right around you uh your thoughts are directed at there are about things that haven't occurred they're not in your immediate environment so there's this there's some sort of decoupling that needs to occur between the neural systems that support a kind of activity and um what the the activity is about what the contents of the activity are and we maintain an argue that that is where the hoppulean views really gonna come uh to be useful um and I think that the it's not just a theoretical claim although we do make some theoretical arguments I also maintain that there's good empirical support that it the kinds of things that we're able to explain now and increasingly so and the kinds of questions that cognitive neurosciences are tackling in the especially in the past five or ten years are yielding to these methods more than they were to these other types of methods to looking at um sort of stimulus bound input output transformations that by circuits in the brain that's just not going to give you that kind of purchase now where which cognitive functions do you you know you know if I'm just studying reflexes okay I'm sharing Tony and if I'm studying imagination okay no question I'm I'm in the in the camp of the hoppule where in the spectrum of cognitive functions does that transition occur that depends I mean I'm not sure I don't have a good answer that you know I think some cognitive functions have placed more and more place more representational demands on on the system and place more sophisticated representational demands on the system than others and so I'm just not sure there's going to be like a a clean cutoff between this I would just I would actually be a bit more extreme for the sake of um you know we're seeing whether it's work on hippocampus whether it's work on temporal lobe whether it's motor cortex in other words it's you know object recognition which we don't call cognition motor cortex that it seems as though when you get into cortex you're in a slightly different neural regime than you are in the brainstem or spinal cord and it may well be that the aggregate behavior of lots and lots of interconnected cortical neurons exploited neural tissue in a qualitatively different way that yields to these kind of analyses that we're talking about okay and so it and again it's just a bet that if we're going to get to the kind of representations that we posit an important for cognition just like we're getting real traction from motor cortex and hippocampus using population level approaches that's going to be what yields the special source for cognition it would be very odd to think that when you go from M1 to pre-motor cortex to prefrontal cortex you suddenly become sharingtonian again right it would be very strange and if you look at um mark recent work on sma versus motor cortex it's actually very interesting that he has to invoke representation for the sma where he subjects it to the same kind of analysis because you actually have to represent the order that you're going through in action that is not important in motor cortex so i would say that he's showing that this extra piece of representation the order of the upcoming sequence is present in sma and it's not present in m1 and and and so you've got a lovely juncture between a representational population analysis in m1 and a non-representational analysis in m1 and a representational level analysis and some trajectories that are very intuition building in sma so it's not that you know you take from 30,000 feet it's just saying that once you get into cortex it seems like this approach is yielding a lot of fruit that is not happening if you try and say neuron a is connected to neuron b is connected to neuron c and and and kind of intuit the computations and representations by following the sequential transmission of information through specific connections it just doesn't work not only does it not work it gives us insight into why we even have cortex you know why don't we just have these series of serial transformations what what why do we need these complex prefrontal cortical zoo with all these you know bizarre menagerie of neural responses um and i think it's because the functions that uh that prefrontal cortex or cortex more generally serves are more sophisticated they require this kind of substrate that can um support these neural functional objects these hoppulean type spaces and manifolds so it gives us insight not just into what these areas are doing but even why these areas exist and because of the representational and and functional demands that were placed on and i've and i've mentioned before you know it's you know yosha bengio and others have actually written a paper a i needs a prefrontal cortex and bengio talks all the time about system two missing from a i it is right now so in other words it isn't it interesting that the a i people are now talking about the importance of the prefrontal cortex they are also saying we don't bengio will say we've got system one worked out so in other words there's this convergence of awareness that there's something extra that can be done in these structures in cortex we're having a clue about how to analyze cortical data outside a prefrontal cortex and now perhaps that same train of thought is going to re-eal to just like mark i think is getting to show as he transitions from m1 to sma then you have pre sma which is considered honorary prefrontal cortex and then into prefrontal cortex it just seems to me a good bet that this approach is going to give us intuitions i i can't see honestly and this could just be my limitation how it's going to be otherwise i don't think anyone would disagree with that or maybe you disagree well hang on let me back up we have like a 10 minutes so i want to make sure we talk a little bit more about a i if you guys have more thoughts about how this approach could benefit or what what's missing in a i and and maybe maybe we should just focus on that but just given the limitations of time unless there's not a lot to say about it because you know john you just mentioned that people and by people you meant bengio and there are others talking about system two consciousness prior sorry i can't help but kind of laugh when the word consciousness is just thrown around in there bringing bringing this so so you know what what prescription can do do you think this approach can provide for a i that that might be missing right now is the bengio approach it or is there more to it so so i think that a i may need to move away from a focus on nodes and connections and you're seeing this certainly in a lot of these analysis of deep neural networks more towards understanding their functionality in terms of state spaces and manifold and these kinds of hoppulean objects and and and a greater concern placed on more complex and and perhaps less discrete aspects of neural activity um i mean i would go so far as to say they may need to move away from from um thinking of nodes and weights is all that needs to be included in so far as these networks want to be biologically inspired so as we say in the paper we speculate that it might turn out that there's that spikes and and and neural activation is really a bit phenomenal and that they're you know what's going on is we're just getting a readout of this of this hoppulean neuro functional type object and that it might be implemented not just by neural activity but by all kinds of uh a lot other types of electroactivity in the brain by large biomolecules and so forth and and maybe that's the kinds of signals that AI needs to start to incorporate and i know that there is an active research program that's trying to do that i will say this which might be more surprising you know AI is really operating i think with sort of fundamentally different material obviously it's in silico and it might be that given the nature of human manufactured computer processors that you're able to do a lot more than you can with sort of our evolutionarily constructed neural processors um and and it might be that they're going to be able to do things in other words they're going to be able to have cognitive or cognitive like behaviors even if they do restrict themselves to a more nodes and connections type view just because the processes that they're working with are so fundamentally more powerful than the ones that biology has endowed us with so you know you know are is this intelligence is this real cognition it may not be we might have to start to sort of brook other notions of intelligence uh besides the biologically inspired one in order to understand the way that these systems operate but that's very speculative what you use the word decoupled earlier and i let's focus on that for a second because you know vaguely in my head right i can see in a deep learning network if you can somehow decouple these higher level representations from the underlying circuitry level representations that that you know i thought you might be going there yeah yeah no just to say something about that i mean i think what gets confusing here and you know is you know there are so many ironies here right good old-fashioned AI was very much worried about these kind of issues you know symbols and common sense and reasoning literally reasoning right right and then it moved away and we had these deflationary projects there was connectionism right which was anti-representational reinforcement learning you could say some people an update of skinnerian behavioralism right so in other words there was this very interesting move away from the original problems and now it's coming full circle right and there's this sort of need whether it's Benjiro talking about prefrontal cortex Paul Smolenski saying that we have to sort of combine go-fi and connectionism and where it comes down to is connectionism as a eliminationism versus connectionism as implementational right now obviously at some point second level explainers are going to be about connections between neurons no one's denying that we certainly aren't but what we're saying is there's some emergent object that is the first level explainer and as we argue in the paper and others like William Ramsey have that it's very difficult to get the representations you need for cognition inside individual nodes and connections the three right and so there's going to have to be some mapping between implementational connectionism and the kind of dynamical you know neuro functional object that actually can break free of those constraints and actually do work and lots of people are worrying about this Paul is particularly eloquent about this but everyone is going to just have to admit that this is a problem and not just think that we can just deflate it by ever better attempts the connectionist project i mean this is why our view is in a pure go bet right we're not making a first principles kind of argument against a sharingtonian network being able to do something cognitive it's rather that it's very difficult to get the kinds of transformations over representations that you need to explain cognition merely by appeal to nodes and networks especially when you have noisy neurons in the brain but you know when we move to in silico neurons and you know in silico connections and the kinds of precision and and and so forth then it's a for me it's an open question about whether or not you can make that progress i would still make them pure go bet just as junded that you need AI to shift as well that it it just doesn't make sense it's hard to see how that kind of approach could yield success but so i would make that empirical bet for AI as well what is the shift that needs to happen because you still have to build a network so you have to you have to implement it in some architecture right right so i think one of the and actually i think there are some analyses of neural networks i can think of a rubber yangs work for example it's really great uh that analyze neural networks from a dynamical systems perspective the state space perspective seeing how different areas of the state space have different structures that can support different types of cognitive function and i think that's the shift you're going to need to use and what you're going to see is that um potentially uh a shift away from let me you know i don't work in AI so i'm going to be very speculative right now but it could be a shift away from a consideration of uh error propagation through back towards you know the different nodes as a result of say performance on a task it depends on what you're optimizing what your optimizing what your error function is um but you could imagine that instead of doing that we're going to try and uh propagate error on the basis of i don't know trying to replicate a certain kind of state space let's say or something like that so that would be a real concrete difference where you the your error function that's going to define the error that you propagate back is going to differ it's going to change from like a task optimization to let's say a dynamics optimization or something like that that would be but i don't work in this field so what for all i know i'm you know uh that's happened i don't know i mean they're worrying about this a lot but you know you had Yuri Hassan on your program right poor um where he talked about you know this direct fit approach and you know he said you know you can do a lot of intelligent as Daniel Dennett calls it competence without comprehension you know you can show intelligent behavior by basically just training up these neural networks and you have such a big data sample that you can get by in life just by interpolation right the but he admitted in his paper and on your show that when it comes to cognition this flexibility this extrapolation he had no idea he just admitted that this approach would not get you there right so in other words we're just at the same aporia whether we're neuroscience or whether we're in AI i think it's delicious that we're exactly at the same gap in both professions we don't know how to get this rich representation either in silico or understand it in euro and it and i don't think that's a coincidence i think it's because we're up against the same problem right and we're going and i don't know who's going to win the race is there going to be some sort of evolutionary algorithm at open AI or deep mind where suddenly oh my god this thing is thinking or there's going to be a more principled approach using the hot field in approach where one begins to see what's required to get thinking i don't know one thing i can tell you whether it's going to be the hot field in approach in big cortical areas or AI i think they have a much more they have much more likely to succeed than going down into an insect and being sharing tonian and calling it cognition finding some kind of circuit motif that you can call micro cognitive and then somehow imagine you can extrapolate from that so if the three projects i think we would argue that doing principled hot field in neuroscience on primates for example or doing work in AI worrying about system two like benjiu is is more likely to yield answers to cognition of the kind we are positing than being sharing tonian in a very small model system so guys this conversation has been very rich it has not scratched the surface of the paper so i apologize we haven't gotten to so many other things with that guys i really appreciate it um sorry i know of taking you over but uh carry on the good work and and we'll catch up again um so grateful for being on yes thanks for having us and it's been it's been awesome yeah it's been a very fun conversation and thank you Paul for being you know so good you know you know in general with the two of us today and basically being almost like a psychotherapist to my skin very very very very very grateful okay thanks all right take care ciao oh brain inspired is a production of me and you i don't do advertisements you can support the show through patreon for a trifling amount and get access to the full versions of all the episodes plus bonus episodes that focus more on the cultural side but still have science go to braininspired.co and find the red patreon button there to get in touch with me email paul at braininspired.co the music you hear is by the new year find them at the new year.net thank you for your support see you next time that takes me