 I blame physicists for this for coming up with a unifying theory. That's too like rap everything. I don't know if we can do that about brain or not, because brain is true for physics as well, but brains were not like design. They were evolved. Once I got into dopamine more, I started liking it more because it has some idiosyncrasies that are very particular about dopamine. They're sort of like the very simple story in the one hand, the very complex reality on the other hand, and the relationship between computation and experiments, and all of that makes it very enticing for me. So this adds, I think, the more complexity that, like, what is the computational unit of the brain? I actually think a little bit of the opposite, which is I think that AI and neuroscience actually can be closer together. This is Brain Inspired. Hey everyone, it's Paul. Those voices you heard were from Ali Mohebi, who's at University of California at San Francisco, and Ben Engelhard, who right now is at Princeton, but will be starting his own lab at the Technion Israel Institute of Technology. So Ali and Ben love dopamine. So much so that they are two of the organizers of the virtual dopamine conference that just had its second iteration. They also love each other, which unfortunately I had already stopped recording when they expressed that mutual admiration, a lot of love in this episode. But today's conversation was originally intended to be a precursor, sort of an introduction for the panel discussion that I moderated at the recent dopamine conference. And that discussion that I moderated, you'll hear soon. It'll be the next episode that I release. But when people love something, they love to talk about it also. And so we did. We talked. And it went longer than we thought it was going to go. And here we are with a full conversation about dopamine. So as you probably know, dopamine is a neuromodulator in the brain. And it's become kind of a darling in AI and neuroscience because it's releasing the brain correlates well with a computational process called the reward prediction error and helps drive learning in that way. So during our conversation, you'll hear more about that. You'll actually get the backstory of how dopamine came to be important, how people have thought of it in the past, how it came to be the darling of reinforcement learning in AI in its simple, elegant role, computing that reward prediction error. And how now, like everything else in the complex mess and or beauty of biology, it seems to be involved in plenty of other cognitive functions. So this conversation is a lot about dopamine and its various roles in cognition. And we talk a lot about those various cognitive functions. And we talk about how to think about the role of dopamine and other neuromodulators with respect to integrating them into a computational role with what we traditionally think of as computing events in the brain like the spiking of neurons. And I also get their reflections on the deep reinforcement learning panel that you will hear soon. Thanks for listening and enjoy. Ali and Ben. Thanks for doing this. So normally what I do is in the introduction to these things, I kind of introduce what the topic was about. But I thought it would be fun to have you guys on since you co-organize the dopamine conference. And kind of get your reflections on the conference as a whole, but also on this panel that people will be listening to in just a moment or two. So I guess I don't usually do this either, but maybe can you just say a word about who you are and what you do? Ali, can you start with you? Oh, okay. So yeah, I can start. I'm Ali Mohebbi. I'm a postdoc at UCSF Department of Neurology. And I am very interested in dopamine and what role it plays in motivation, learning, cognition, et cetera. Okay, so I was going to immediately want to ask a question, but then maybe you could say just a word about yourself. Yeah, so I'm Ben Engelhard. I'm also a postdoc currently at Princeton in the Neurology Department and starting my old lab in a couple of months in the technology on Institute in Israel. Congratulations, Ben. Thanks so much. Although we were just talking a moment ago about how hard that move is going to be in, especially in today's climate and just in general, selling cars, things of that. Yeah, but you know, with three kids, I'm sure it's going to be a breeze. So. How did you guys get interested? So first of all, this was year two of the dopamine, the virtual dopamine conference. Right. Just give us the backstory of how the conference got started and tell us all about the super high demand that led to it being continued in year two. Yeah, so I'm going to give a brief response. I'm going to let the lead take over because the way I sense it started is one day, Alimo may be woke up and said we're in the middle of a lockdown. It's I think it was April 2020 or something like that. And he said, you know, we can't do anything. We can go outside. We can't have a conference. We can't meet people. Let's change that. And so he basically recruited a few people, either students or postdocs. We were five in total. And he said, you know, let's, let's make a conference. And so that's how we started. And then we ended up organizing everything pretty quickly. We started contacting all the speakers. We had an amazing response. We contacted like, you know, some of the best speakers in the field and pretty much everyone said, yeah, I want to do it because nobody could do anything. I guess so we were the only the only option in town. And that's how the first one started. And I think that because it was available to everybody anywhere in the world, we got over 2,000 people registered in which is a pretty large number for sort of a niche, you know, neuroscience conference for the subject of dopamine, not just the neuroscience in general, but just dopamine. Yeah. So that was a huge success. And also the quality of the talks was very impressive. So Ollie, did it come to you in a dream? So you just woke up and it was there, huh? I live in San Francisco, which means that I'm locked in a like teeny tiny studio box. And then when we went into lockdown, I was going crazy. I'm just bouncing off the walls. I thought you were going to talk about a psychedelic experience because you went out there. I thought you were going to go that route there. But yeah, I mean, I think my friend Christine Liu at some point she suggested this idea on Twitter that, well, our dopamine meeting is going to get canceled. We were all supposed to go to Montreal for this dopamine meeting. And then she was like, yeah, it would be nice if we have like a gathering of a few of us enthusiasts. And then during a psychedelic trip, perhaps, or something, it came to my mind that what if we do this conference, what if we put a conference together, a virtual dopamine conference? And I reached out to Christine and I'm like, Christine, let's do this. It was an amazing experience for all. Yeah. So the dopamine, dopamine, my role in this was I moderated this panel that people are going to hear that is was based off the premise of modern, the explosion of modern deep reinforcement learning. And kind of how that interacts with the rest of the dopamine story. So which is, I don't know how much of the dopamine, how much of the conference is focused on the sort of systems neuroscience part of dopamine versus the reinforcement learning side. It seems like a pretty big blend of all of it. But how did you guys get into dopamine? Dopamine was something I always avoided when I was going through a computational neuroscience program because it was too systemsy, you know, too wet. And it was, but it was everywhere already back then dopamine, dopamine, but I was like, yes, that important. So how did, how did you guys get into it? So I got into it, I got into it by mistake. My PhD had nothing to do with dopamine. I was working on cortex, you know, doing like cortex like things, you know, brain machine interfaces and learning and stuff like that. And I think the link to learning a little bit maybe led to it in that direction, but it was mostly when I was looking for postdocs in the US and I traveled all around the US and talked a bunch of people. And I started to think what I want from my postdoc and what there was at Princeton was this sort of, for me, an amazing opportunity working with people like Ilana Witten and David Tank in a virtual reality system with mice and sort of cutting-edge technologies. And it was about dopamine, which is related to learning, which is under that I was caring about. So, you know, all these things together, I said, let's do this. And once I got into the dopamine more, I started liking it more because it has some, I would say some idiosyncrasies that are very particular. Even within the system neuroscience field, you know, there's something very particular about dopamine, the sort of like the very simple story in the one hand, you know, the very complex reality on the other hand and the relationship between computation and experiments. And all of that makes it very enticing for me to say. The very simple story that you're that you referred to there is what is what deep reinforcement learning is kind of based on. It's one of the most, quote unquote, successful stories in bringing together things like artificial intelligence and things like neuroscience that dopamine underlies a reward prediction error that leads to reward. And there's very specific circuitry associated with it. But, but the other thing that you alluded to is that that's not the only story. And we talk about that some in the panel as well. So, I just wanted to make sure that we hammered that home that I believe that's the particular story you were referring to. Yeah, it is, you know, to learning, you know, the ideas by by shots showing the reward prediction error response of dopamine year and how it relates to learning. Then the idea that this basically a single that's propagated throughout the brain and mostly straddle, the single goals, let's say to ventral straight on the account, which is sort of considered one of the sites for learning. And then you potentiate the courtes, cortical straight all connection, the sign up says, you know, based on this reward prediction error signal. And that's how you learn. And you know, that's works great for simple things like polyuretic conditioning. And there's been a bunch of experiments showing that. But the more we learn about the circuitry and the more we do behavior that is more complex and the more we look at, you know, the brains in general, we see how this simple story is starting to become stickier and stickier. Because Ali, is that sad or is that a happy thing that don't because dopamine has a bigger role now we think or is yeah, okay. So I actually want to have a revisionist history of dopamine. Oh, yes. I think we should go guys where it's where I'll start it from, right? I mean, so if you look at dopamine and what's like dopamine, what did we know about dopamine and when? I mean, dopamine, we knew at some point that had something to do with movements, right? And we knew this like many other things in neuroscience by a malfunction. So we know that in Parkinsonian disease patients, they lose their dopamine cells, majority of the dopamine cells. And they, something that comes wrong with their movements, right? So for a long time, people believe that we're looking for movement related signals in the dopamine. And then at around the same time, there was this other idea of dopamine having some role in learning from rewards, which goes back to like, olds and milleners and stuff in McGill where they would put an electrode, they would stick an electrode in the rat's head. And every once in a while when rat is visiting one corner of a cage, they would zap him or her. And they would see that rodents, the rat is more interested to explore those corners of the cage. And then they realize that depending on where exactly they stick this probe, the likelihood of rodents visiting those corners becomes more and more. And when they put it in like mid-brain VTA dopamine, ergic cells, I mean, this is where the rats get, um, starts visiting that corner more and more often. So people start hypothesizing that dopamine has something to do with rope war. So these two accounts, it starts to like develop mostly like independently. One is more like in the psyched departments. And then on the neurology side, people interested in Parkinson's disease started looking at dopamine and interpreting dopamine in that sense. And so I mean, another thing that perhaps inspired by Skinner and Walden too was that there's some aspect of reinforcement in this dopamine signal because like Oldsen Milner were able to teach the rats to press a lever by linking a lever press to zap in the dopamine orgic system. So these take a lecture, zap them, they learn to press a lever. So there is now some reinforcement that motivates you to go and push the lever for a benefit. You just referenced Walden too. I read that book many years ago before I knew what before I was a neuroscientist. Is it actually in that book? And is that a good book? Should I reread it? I don't think I should, but maybe you should reread it. Yeah, I read it like year or two ago and it was interesting. I think if you have ideas about how to shape society or how to like reinforce acts for values and virtues that you want, and is it even possible, I think it's a good idea to revisit that book. It's a novel, right? It's a novel by Skinner, right? So the most. Yeah, Skinner. Right. So I mean, this whole idea of how you can reinforce things and put, potentiate acts and things that you value more. So and like here, it's like quite related also. So I mean, this whole series of experiments, another reason they got a boost was that this is a good animal model for studying addiction. That you get some stimulation in the dopaminergic system and you keep going back and back to the sites that you received the stimulation or keep doing the acts that led you to this feeling of it. So this is how I dopaminer involved in the addiction research and in the motivation. But then these fields evolve separately from each other and both from Schultz actually and his last years talk at Vida, he started going through this very brief history of dopaminer. When he started looking at dopaminer, he was after the movement signals. He had like monkeys sitting on a chair and moving these bars doing center out reach tasks and such. And to his surprise, they were like absolutely zero dopamine cells that would respond to the movements itself. And they were confused. He was like, yeah, I'm recording from muscles, I'm recording from mouth, I'm recording from eyes. I see movements. I see movement signals in the EMG of these muscles, but I don't see anything in the dopamines cells. And years later, I mean, with the advent and popularity of reinforcement and learning, the people started looking at and reinterpreting Schultz data and they realized that it might have something to do with the reward prediction error. So I think the point is, did not start. So this is the revisionist part. Did not start with the prediction error. No, I agree. But I agree with what you said about sort of the diverging views about the movements, and the addition of the additional reinforcement studies. But I think that at least at some point, and probably even now, but certainly, previously, people sort of thought about because we know that there are different sort of canonical pathways of dopamine more typically, you know, what's called the mesochordical limbic perhaps, which is VTA to a conference and then to cortex, and then perhaps the Nygrost trail, which is, you know, substantial Nygrost cross compact to a stradum. This is the dorsal part. And so I think that people did associate sort of the Nygrost trail pathway mostly with Parkinson because in Parkinson's, the dopamines would die are mostly in the SNC and not so much in the VTA. In fact, there is sort of like a line that sort of divides and you can actually look at it if you stay in for something called co-binding. You can actually see the difference between SNC and VTA dover neurons. And the SNC one dies if VTA does not. And the SNC has sort of some of the different protection patterns. So I think people associated the movement, such Parkinson function with depth of these, you know, SNC substantial Nygrost dopamine neurons. And perhaps even having a permissive role rather than a proactive role. So the idea is that maybe if you have enough dopamines straight up because these dopamines I give you this sort of tonic signal, tonic signal, right? So this constant, you know, constant release of dopamines, maybe that's enough to have movements. And that's all you need. And then maybe that's why you're not seeing any movement signals in these neurons perhaps. And the VTA neurons, the sort of mesochordical limbic pathway, that the one that's been more associated with reinforcement as well as addiction and perhaps motivation. I don't disagree. I think one of the appeals of the dopamine story in the past was that how beautiful and there's like a unifying theory of dopamine cells and this is a global broadcast signal. That's they're just sitting there. And if you read some of like short stories or even like others have been proposing dopamine as this broadcast signal that these cells are just sitting there regardless of which type they are. Recording from SNC cells in the case of most of actually his recordings were from AA to SNC and then some from VTA. Majority of them do send this broadcast word prediction error signal. And I think that's one of the beauties of this theory. But then in recent years we are, there's people are paying more and more attention to like different functions of dopamine such as yourself in your 2019 paper where you start talking about different roles that dopamine cells have in different functions. So I think we are, it's exciting times to be studying dopamine because we are going back to some of our like original thoughts because like the appeal of this reward prediction error theory. I think was so much and it made this like focus bit too much on one aspect of dopamine function for the past maybe 20 years. And like early on another aspect of dopamine function that I forgot to mention is its role in cognition and cognitive aspects like working memory, attention and through the work of one of the early works from like late 70s from Pat Goldman Rekish and her colleagues at Yale University was that how dopamine in the pre-frontal cortex plays a role in sticking to ideas, keeping something in your mind. And like she and her colleagues ran a bunch of experiments like increasing dopamine in the cortex specifically in the pre-frontal cortex or atlating dopamine in the pre-frontal cortex and see how like these like working memory function get affected and they link it to some mental health disorders such as like ADHD, schizophrenia and others. But this work is also I think has been overshadowed by this success of the dopamine equal reward prediction error theory and people are slowly going back to those ideas using new tools and testing some old theories coming up with new hypotheses etc. This is why I asked though if it's a sad thing because there's an attraction to the simplistic explanations of because it's a simple explanation is powerful right dopamine is this and of course the problem is it's never that way at least in the brain but you know I can't tell you how many times I've been reading you know there's a story about two brain areas that are connected in some direction away and and then just a few years later it's always actually they're also connected bidirectionally and through three different pathways and it just always just explodes into the mass of complexity that is the problem that is the challenge of facing facing us. Yeah I think that you know we I mean naturally I would say we tend to look for this sort of simplified explanation because that makes it easier to understand I mean otherwise it's very hard to just from the very get go look at something that's in probably complex and makes sense of it and with regards to what Alisa said about sort of the the working memory by Golan Raquich and others that was also together with the movement story that was also at least in part I think by them too associated with sort of the idea of a tonic dopamine signal sort of like a very slowly changing dopamine release and that was contrasted with the sort of phasic signal which was like a very very strong rapid burst of dopamine years which was associated with the reward prediction error so even then when the dichotomy was known right because it was known as Alisa from in the 70s in 79 was the was the main paper that was published by Golan Raquich it was known that there is an effect in working memory and there is an effect on movement people say you know what there's sort of like these two dopamine signals the tonic one that sort of like slight changes very slowly and has a mostly permissive role sort of allowing the downstream circuits to do their thing either movements in stradum or perhaps working memory in internal cortex and then you have this sort of phasic signal sort of like rapidly changing rapid burst that would I have a role for reinforcement and and again of course that cannot you know it's not going to turn out to be the case because as you said things are always more complex that they seem but but I think it makes sense to start with some so I'm not criticizing you know the past because it makes sense to start with that you need to have a starting point we can make sense of things and it's not wrong to simplify as long as you keep an open mind that it's probably going to be more complex that you're sort of simplified in my mind I mean this is a topic for another conversation elsewhere but maybe I should just mention for the reference that I don't believe in tonic dopamine right but we can discuss it else oh no believe in it I don't believe in it I don't believe in it I have to address that now yeah it's a slight diversion and that's fun you know the antagonism is good for the for the podcast let's diverge okay let's diverge I mean I don't understand what tonic dopamine means I mean what the dopamine signal what you measure is either firing of dopamine cells right dopamine cells have the tonic firing that is on their pacemaking cells they fire like three or four spikes per second on average some of them a bit more so a little bit less but then sometimes they fire these bursts of spikes and that's how they do they don't you don't see dopamine cells changing their baseline firing rate at all like I've recorded from bunch of dopamine cells haven't seen anything like this which either is lab have recorded Jeremiah Cohen and others in this lab have recorded from bunch of dopamine cells you don't see at any point in time dopamine cells change their baseline firing right so it we don't see it in any context we have tried it a few times I mean of course absence of evidence is not evidence of absence but um we don't have to use the I'm surprised by this argument coming from you Ali because you're one of the main people that are sort of exploring this idea about how actually the release of dopamine in the in the actions of these cells is might not be related in some cases to the firing of the cells themselves and so you can still have fluctuations based on sort of external processes like maybe at CTACOLINE right which I think you're explored as well and other people too and so you can have sort of a baseline five hertz of four hertz firing which will give you a relatively constant with some noise fluctuations of atomic dopamine release and then you could have sort of modulation of that release perhaps with some sort of external um external processes and of course we don't know how much modulation would actually need because again if it's a permissive role then it's enough to have maybe the five hertz gives you what you need to have movements and then maybe there is some modulation on top of that which will make movements you know change them a little bit I think with golden or a teach they have this inverted you you shape sort of idea where you have too much dopamine is not good and too little dopamine is not good and sort of you know the goldilocks idea of dopamine for working memory so maybe the five hertz is sitting somewhere you know around the goldilocks zone and then you can have sort of external processes that would mold like that so that's why I was surprised by this argument coming from you of all people okay just to answer your surprise and then we can move on I mean this could be like in every end income so I'm happy to chat further but I mean yes so that's the second part of my argument that now when you look at dopamine release you don't again see slow events so with tonic what people often mean is that there's this like inherently slow change in the signal when you look at dopamine release there's also now that we have the tools you look at them like in a very fine temporal resolution you would see these rapid bursts of activity or like slow a very fast changing so one thing that I think and we think in our lab that might have alluded to this tonic modulation of dopamine concept was that our measurement tools of dopamine release were slow so if you measure signals slowly you made the doose that it's a slowly changing signals but as you start using better and better tools with better temporal resolution that's made available just in the past like two or three years we don't see slow changes in dopamine signal what what is what is slow versus fast here because a spike is fast and a neurotransmitter is slow but it depends on how that's exactly one of the I think one of one of the reasons I think this tonic dopamine thing is ill-defined that no one can give a good timescale of what is the timescale of a phasic versus tonic dopamine if it's changing faster than or slower than 20 hertz is it now called tonic or tonic is a task of micro dialysis only right because the dialysis you measure like dopamine concentration every 10 minutes so it could be I mean this whole notion could have been just a no but obviously I'm joking but look for example in cortex we know that the re-optic of dopamine is pretty slow right compared to for example the stradum where the re-optic is pretty fast so and or ion channels in a neuron membrane right that's all right so you can you can really imagine even if you have sort of fast signals you know in dopamine release you know because the slow slow kinetics kinetics of the re-optic in cortex for example you could you could end up with sort of like smeared slower changes in in dopamine concentrations and and the other point is that I don't think that you know the theory required for example by golden wreckage I don't think the theory is required you know like very precise modulation of the tonic single that is that so you're in a bath of dopamine and you know if you have a good enough level you know within a range you can do you know your working memory is gonna is gonna work fine right so I don't I mean you were talking about the modulation of the tonic single but I don't think that was ever really a strong focus of video of these theories I mean yeah that goes into I mean many of those studies I mean I these were like super luminative and like insightful for me but they were using like late 70s tools which mostly is like slow pharmacology I mean dump bunch of dopamine in some part of the brain let us stick around for a few hours and see what effect it has on like activity of these cells which is very different from its physiological time course and now I think with better tools like optogenetics and other things we can have we can start like dissecting dopamine energy signals in the front to cortex within the physiological time range that dopamine is affecting it and in fact that's something I will be doing in the next few years oh very nice that's go ahead go ahead yeah no I just want to say again a little bit playing a grumpy advocate that that is true that you know optogenetics in terms of the temporal resolution is so much better than pharmacology but in terms of the I don't know like cellar resolution or maybe spatial resolution you're still when you're doing prasama activation you're activating in a very non-philosic way right you activate the entire baldon bundle you know super strong so I think that we don't really yet have you know if you talk about you were talking about physiological sort of like endogenous like type of manipulations I don't think we're there yet I should say more physiological definitely no I would agree with that but I just want to point out the caveat that we're still you know we still don't have the tool that would say that would give us ability to you know do a manipulation that would really mimic the way the activity is normally happening so this is a good illustration of taking a perfectly simple story there's phasic and there's tonic and and and and just finding all sorts of problems with it in issues and you know there's a complete gradient between phasic and tonic and maybe there's an analog computation within that gradient blah blah blah and it seems like if the brain can do something with the tools it has it it does and I don't maybe maybe this is a good time just to segue into the panel discussion oh yeah come on guys rain it in raining it and no but I think that this was a good illustration of the the complexities involved in these sorts of things rather than so what you know now all of a sudden deep reinforcement learning is looks like a very simple clean story relative to like what's actually happening in the brain which is you know presumably these are things are all based on a related to or an analog of dopamine related computation in brains so maybe just kind of to segue into that uh into the topics that we discuss in the panel I don't know if you guys have thoughts about how the panel went or if anything surprised you or or if you know it was kind of on par for the deep deep reinforcement learning kind of discussion I don't think I was really surprised um I was hoping that we would go a little bit more and talk about dopamine I guess because the nature of the conference and that didn't happen too much but I think that's sort of a reflection of where the field is right now which is sort of a slip grappling with the idea of deep learning vis-a-vis brain learning and we sort of stuck a little bit in trying to figure out the differences and similarities and how to actually relate that and I think that most of the people that work with deep are all they don't care about dopamine at all I mean they either care about you know doing better AI or perhaps care about you know maybe relating you know AI to a behavior and I think what's really missing is the third part of the triangle which will be the circuit itself and I think that part seems to me and I'll be maybe maybe has a different perspective more removed from the conversation related to deep parallel right now but that was the part that we were like trying to focus more I guess in the conference but I think the panel's all reflected where the field is which is more okay thinking about the AI part and perhaps let's just do behavior part you know maybe more high level part uh more high level view and a bit less more removed from the circuit part there was circuitry talk in the beginnings uh and I don't know if it continued throughout and I tried to keep bringing it back but but to your good you did good yeah thanks man I was feeling down about it but you know to your credit you know one of the question within the abstract is can these new advances in deep reinforcement learning help us understand the role that dopamine plays in learning so but you're right um it was not very dopamine focused most of the time yeah I mean one thing that's um like I surprised me I think was like Matt but when it's self-iclaimed radical idea towards the end that brains are deep learning agents or something to that extent deep learning deep reinforcement learning deep that's right deep RL systems which is interesting I'm not sure if I agree with that right because I mean how would you define deep I mean maybe there's these are just like loaded words you can define anything to be like deep reinforcement learning right but is it true is it true that brain is implementing a reinforcement or a deep reinforcement learning algorithm are read by this discrediting all the other cognitive aspects of brain function for example like the memory systems right that are somehow again involved with like dopamine or like either it's like hippocampal episodic memory uh related systems uh or like prefrontal working memory type systems I mean these are involved in learning in many kinds of actually tasks that we train human and animals to perform it's not just a simple reinforcement learning algorithm like EQ learning actor critic or any of these uh systems that are involved so I'm not sure I mean yes maybe if you define like memory to include what you're not sure I am not sure if like yeah I mean there's an appeal to this and uh I think it's I blame physicists for this for coming up with a unifying theory that's like wrap everything I don't know if we can do that about brain or not because brain I guess it's true for physics as well but brains were not like design they were evolved and one of the fascinating ideas in neuroscience in general for me is that you have these like multiple different systems that were evolved during different times for different purposes and then they compete with each other for behavioral expression so if you're learning to solve a two-armed band-aid uh problem for example I mean uh if you're designing an algorithm we can design a reinforcement learning algorithm that would solve this like beautifully and perfectly using TD uh reinforcement learning algorithm use just an RPE the an action values etc etc to solve this but when you train a human or train a rat mind key to do this are they just doing it the same way that you do and I think this goes back maybe to a broader uh question reflection of neuroscience these days that can you if you can explain an animal's behavior using a computational model can you there infer from this that brain is using that specific process to solve this problem or not and I would like to see more conversation about that I think this was like a blessed panel with the stars of a conversation but in the coming years I would like to see more and more conversation about like what is it that we can learn that's like are we at a point that the divergence between artificial intelligence and neuroscience has gone so far that there's no way I mean these are now different um like totally different processes different disciplines or are there things that can each learn from each other and I think I'm not there was a good start for this conversation okay so that was uh that was very interesting I want to remark on several things I one of times will just be a couple so the first is that I mean you were very very polite when you said I'm not sure whether the brain is an our deep parallel system look I don't think math believes that the brain isn't I mean it was obviously sort of you know putting it like in a sort of an extreme way um uh provocative and obviously he works on the parallel system but clearly we know that the brain does so many different things in so many different ways that it cannot just be one thing um I I think the question is whether there is reinforcement happening happening at all in the way that we think about in the brain and I think that sort of the dopamine story points towards the answer yes so far you would have to bet I would bet yes how exactly it's implemented I don't know is it the only thing that happening no it's not you know but but certainly uh yeah I think this is you know this extreme views even the people who say they don't think they really believe them fully just you know a way of starting a conversation is sort of uh pointing out to the direction which could be useful um and so regarding the your last point uh I actually think a little bit of the opposite which is I think that AI and neuroscience are actually coming closer together and the reason that sort of inspired me got me excited about this panel is the fact that in deep parallel you have something of a very poor version perhaps of a circuitry as compared to all the previous reinforcement models and that's something that I I said I looked at that when I first looked at this idea of the parallel okay so we're getting closer in the sense that we might have something to anchor to because one of the problems that we have is exactly what I'll say which is you have a model and you try to replicate almost behavior and if you're very good at tweaking your model you'll be able to do it right because that's what models do they're they're very general typically and the more general it is the better your chances are to tweaking it and then sort of recapitulating a behavior and then you can say well you know maybe the animal use demo and there's it's not there's no great way like all these said of actually validating that and for me the devolidation that would satisfy me would have to do with a prediction about the circuitry that would be a little maybe even dependent of the animal behavior which you could then go ahead and sort of probe the brain by neck with an experiment and try to see whether that you know comes whether that's being validator or not where we get something close to what we thought and so for me you know or I thought about deep or L and dopamine I said all right now we have a way maybe towards you know looking at the circuitry that's been that would be predicted by the model and getting experimental predictions from that and then going to the brain and trying to do an experiment where we could test those predictions and so my sense is that ultimately whether the brain does something like deep or L for me I would like to see a validation that involves a prediction about the circuitry that's being proposed by the model that then is being validated by mr. no I think that's a good idea so I mean basically what I guess you're suggesting is that like Mars level two should inform us something about like level three perhaps which is interesting I mean yeah right level three because because if you just stay on the behavioral level again you can always have a model that does whatever behavior you might find and if the behavior is the opposite you can find a model that does the opposite too I mean that's not when you have something general I mean when I started I was doing more stuff more system more cortex and people had this idea about how more cortex codes for movement which is we're in a sort of like vector way all the cells sort of vote to which direction the arm moves and so on and then came the idea about sort of optimal control and how what the more the cortex might be doing is to minimize a cost function that would enable you to move like an optimal control system to what engineer would think about and one of the main successes of this idea was to recapitulate all sorts of behaviors that people or animals did the way they moved the kinematics of the movement and so on the way they would overshoot their target or undershoot in different type of tasks and for each of these papers and I'm being very flippant and unfair on purpose they would change the cost function in a way that would allow them to recapitulate that behavior and again I'm being unfair so don't I mean I'm not being unrepresent serious but I want to bring the point that you know when you have a general enough theory and you can play with it then recapitulating a particular behavior might not be that that's that's stronger for proof and that is why I would like to sort of mess up the Mars levels and go to the secretory and get predictions from that to help us you know get a better stronger proof about whether this more is actually related to what's happening in the past. Yeah fair I mean just for me to wrap up maybe and then I'll shut up soon. I think the way I see it actually dopamine system is a very good example for the Mars three levels and actually the link between dopamine and three enforcement learning that at the first level what I see is that there's a problem to be solved which is how to maximize the expected sum of future rewards. This is the problem that reinforcement learning tries to solve and whether or not brains or like natural agents are doing that or not I'm not quite sure economists would tell you that yes this is exactly what humans brains are designed to do just maximize future rewards I'm not quite sure about that but reinforcement learning proposes this series of algorithms and I mean we have the old ones that I've read are like Q learning, acrocritic, Sarsa, etc etc and we try to link them to some brain function to find the mechanism that would implement these functions so this is the part that I'm not sure whether or not we can get a good link between these like algorithms and the way the mechanisms they're implemented in the brain. But like what I see maybe just to say sentence or two about how I perceive this conference beyond the panel there were a few good things and hopes lights at the end of this tunnel that we are getting better tools I mean we saw a few talks that are like introducing new tools including like Ehwood Issycoff's like amazing new tools that would help us figure out a few things about better and better about mechanism like in past two or three years the dopamine research field has like shifted tremendously because of the advent I think of these like fluorescent dopamine sensors from like Lentian's lab and others and then I saw a few glimpses of a good observation leading to theory one that I particularly I'm very fond of was Melissa Wardens observation that how dopamine ramps can be linked to cognitive maps or to exploration of this idea of cognitive maps I think this is what we need more and more in neuroscience to find the mechanism to make an observation and then try to come up with a theory at least the links this to some behavioral function and I saw an example of this in the list of talks that was that make the hopeful that we're making some progress yeah I love that and that's exactly sort of the mixing of the levels that I'm very fond of because that's really you know when I that gives me much more confidence that it's really the reality when I see that it's sort of it bears out in at least two different levels and I think that's what that's what we need to do and I agree people are doing that and of course we're limited by the tools we have but even with the tools we have there's lots more things that that we can do so I was what I was hoping for is to give some context to the panel here and what I expected happened where I got a lot more did you guys get everything in that you wanted to talk about I think so yeah I mean I have a few other points that are like random points that I wanted to talk about but I think we I mean one of them maybe I want just to say here because it links to your show which I'm a big fan of by the way and I like to keep it's like an audio form not to make it a talk show because I used to listen it during not to it during the mic commute and yeah it's like it's very informative oh good thanks I mean you had met Smith on your show and I forgot I think it was episode 85 86 96 I forgot I'm very sorry I apologize that's all here buddy yeah and he was talking about this fascinating idea of slow drift which I think it's an amazing observation and I like to link that to dopamine and neuromodulatory systems I think it's a fascinating avenue for future research and this may link to like more computational or neural network architectures as well that what we currently are inspired by in our neural nets are like fast neurotransmission meaning like excitatory inhibitory connection right that's like this unit A neuron A fires and then it would excite or inhibit neuron B and this is like a rapid summation in one step but what neuromodulators do is that they don't necessarily have an excitatory inhibitory effect they change the states of a neuron or a network in a way that they would respond differently to futures stimuli is this like roshan kool's work on switching states is on to that kind of thing maybe it goes even back to like some of the ideas that I've seen abandoned now by like their shwitz and germy semen's that's like how like dopamine changes the states of the network like different dopamine receptors when activated would move you through this like state space to different like basins of the attractor which I think these were like amazing theoretical ideas that have not been explored and what Matt talked about in your previous one of the previous episodes reminded me of that that dopamine has this role in like attention for example and these slow drifts might have been related to that and we currently have no way of incorporating these in our computational models in our artificial neural networks and this might be an avenue to do something which is like yeah I see myself at least in the future doing that I propose this to the Simon Foundation but I think it's a fascinating idea and we'll see more of this in the future have like these like different neuromodulatory signals like dopamine is one acetilcholine serotonin norepinephrine have these like not neurotransmitter not not neurotransmitter these neuromodulatory signals change the state of the network yeah if there's a connection back to the AI maybe this is something that we can contribute to their understanding maybe this can be one of the wings of that plane I was originally going to ask you and now I'm going to bring it back in about your thoughts broadly about a where are we an understanding dopamine and its roles like broadly right but then b I I wanted to get back to this idea of you know the idea of neuromodulatory modulations being slow and traditionally you think when you think about computation you think about binary you think about spikes or not spikes ones or zeros and that's how you compute things but do you think we're trending toward a multi multi temporal scaling story of computation where neuromodulatory effects might be a slow part of that computation whereas the spiking is just another faster part of the computation and where we're going to get this eventual hierarchy of kind of scaled temporal computation that's a lot to think about I know and that's those were two different questions but if you have thoughts on either of those I'd love to hear so in response to your second question maybe first question or yeah let's let's start with the first question I think we touched on that a bit I think we are learning more and more I mean as we are graduating from this dopamine RPU theory which is again an elegant account of dopamine function I like I like the graduating term term there yeah sure and I think we are going back to test out some of the older ideas and we are on and as we get like better and better tools for probing dopamine function we are starting to explore the role of dopamine in different functions and different aspects of behavior as some people have shown in like a series of thoughts during this virtual dopamine conference but in response to your second question I think it's that's very true right that we need this to like somehow introduce this idea of processing at different timescales and my pitch to the Simon Foundation for this idea was that I mean if you look at behavior behaviors evolve over a very different timescale right whereas like new transmission is super fast it happens in like milliseconds but behavior the timescale of behavioral changes are much slower and much different you have different behaviors that happen and pan out at different timescales and what could link these two fast processes and slow behavior could be the neuromodulatory systems and as like Ben was suggesting earlier for example like dopamine as like usual suspect of all neuromodulation I mean you have this idea that yes dopamine cells fire and then they dump bunch of dopamine in different parts of the brain and what happens is that these different parts will absorb this dopamine and they have different rates of absorption because there are different mechanisms involved in the absorption for example and the strata on sub-cortical regions you have transporters that will just suck out dopamine and put it back inside the cells and then density of these dopamine transporters are different even in different sub-regions of the strata but then in the cortex you don't have dopamine transporters it has to be metabolized and that's a much slower process so dopamine is hanging around for much longer in different up to like 30 seconds perhaps right if you get a simple puff of dopamine it will like hang out there for much longer compared to like straight and where it gets like to within a second you mean like a tonic signal right now just does not get into that but so I mean and the reason I think this is an opinion idea is that if you look at these like different modules of the brain different parts of the cortex or different parts of the brain that have evolved then have these like local micro circuit stream valve but then for the new modularity systems there's always one region one nucleus or at least mostly one nucleus in the brain that projects them to like all over the brain and with broadcast this signal so that's another appeal of this dopamine as a broadcast signal that you have dopamine cells sitting in a midbrain and then they just dump dopamine all over the brain so that to me is something that could change the states of the brain this how you process you get more dopamine you process things differently now the same inputs would mean like a different thing we had this recent paper you know it came out in science from Adam Kepich lab where he was looking at hallucinations or hallucinatory perceptions halips I think they call it and their idea is that sometimes the mouse hears things that are not out there things that they heard something and then they move and what they shows that how this is related to the dopamine levels in one particular part of the stridome and the tail of stridome in the back so I think yeah the same cues then would mean different things or the absence of the cues I mean these neuromodular theory signals change the state of the network and how these network process information or even same information would mean different things so that's why don't yeah I mean I think that the issue of time scales is actually even even worse than that because even if you just talk about regular neurotransmitters and not neuromodulators you still have different synopsis can have very different timescales and in fact if you look at computational models some of the models depending on the time scale of the synapse you can have a very different type of behavior there are some rate models where if you have synapses are slower than 20 milliseconds let's say then they behave in a completely different way than it would behave as synapses are faster in like 10 or so okay so even with the downtime scale the network itself can be very different and you can explore that computationally depending on you know the time scale of the synapses by a few milliseconds of change and then of course you have the neuromodulators which right now are being modeled either as very fast or very very slow because let's remember synaptic plasticity right that's sort of the big effect of the neuromodulators like dopamine in this computational models and that's a very very slow you know a time scale and so but of course within that range of you know few milliseconds versus you know minutes let's say you still have what Ali talked about which is how you know you can have fluctuations in the way the the neurons change its state and the network change its state and that has been mostly I think explored by cellophysiologists a bit perhaps less by computational or or even maybe systems on your scientists they're starting to do a little bit now I think and and so that's as a new layer of complexity which is something I like I like complexity maybe that's why I'm starting the brain and just to piggyback on this idea of complexity you know Ali your idea of the you know the appeal I understand the appeal of the broadcast signal where you have the same signal that goes everyone the brain and then different brain areas will process differently depending on the kinetics of the reactic of dopamine and depending on their own characteristics of the network but even that story I would argue about a complexity because we know that different dopamine projections can transmit different signals to different areas and so even then you have this other complexity within even with the same nucleus where you have this concentration of dopamine release in neurons or other nuclei when you have sort of let's say avenium related that's been released you can still have you know different streams of information that's being transmitted to different places as well so I think that the more we're going to delve in more we're going to find that we have this further and further subdivision and further further complexity because of this again this is something that Ali said and then there was also a loop in the panel that that brains evolved and they evolved in a way that sort of disorganized and chaotic and just gets things to work and that I think naturally results in in a huge amount of complexity is one way to think about this so recently there's been a and a lot of success in using dynamical systems theory to basically reduce the dimension of our brain of activity in our brain so our brain has tons of neurons and they're all firing but you can reduce the dimension so that the neural firing is fairly bound to a lower-dimensional manifold lower-dimensional shape essentially and its trajectories along those manifolds that underlie some of the computation but what you just said is that we may need to then increase the dimension if we're considering how different areas are responding in different ways to the same signal and how that increases the complexity the amount of interactions going on and I don't know if that's a if it's worthwhile thinking about it in terms of how that story might map on to the let's make everything low-dimensional story I mean it's very appealing to make everything all-dimensional because then we can do you know we can put it on a graph and we can look at it if it's through dimensions you know that that's visual and we have visual creatures so I think that's part of the appeal but again you know this idea about dimensional reproduction we need to remember that the dimension of the reduction all the idea about dimensions basically are a reflection of the correlations between neurons right how much the activity between neurons is collated or not that that's all it is and so if you have a lot of neurons that are highly correlated you know even if the perus correlations are not big but the collations overall are strong then you will be able to do this in dimensional reduction if you have a very low correlation the neurons are independent everyone is doing their own thing then you can't reduce the dimensional and so I think it's it's clear that you know neurons are connected so they're going to have some correlations and the more neurons you record the more saturation you're going to have on the amount of of information which allows you to reduce the dimensionality more and more I relatively speaking but of course that's typically done within a single-bran area maybe even within a single condition and I think that the more you go into multiple-bran areas and receiving multiple inputs including multiple neural neural neural neural inputs then it's going to be harder and harder to just think about a 2D space that you can actually plot your graph in different colors and call it today I mean there is the visual visualization aspect but there also is the aspect of figuring out where the saddle points are figuring out where the attractors are where where you can predict what state the system will be in given its initial state and the condition right you you will know fairly accurately if you know the surface of the manifold the shape the topology then you know where the activity will end up right so there is there's a kind of the patient of the damage as well I think that's independent of the dimensionality I mean you could have attractors you know you could have attractors be completely independent as well sure um so I think that it's easier to look at the attractors uh in a lower spatial space yeah for sure I'll lay anything to add we've gone of course but that's fine yeah I mean no no I think yeah I have my own like interests and skepticism about these like dimensionality reduction thing I agree with Ben that it's they're like amazing visualization tools and I think it's a good good descriptive language for like what computation uh the circuit or specific circuits might be doing but I'm not sure that what we would learn beyond that about the like circuit dynamics or circuits underpinning circuits of a certain behavior right but I think absolutely it's a good descriptive way of computation I guess I was bringing it up just because uh it seems like a hopeful story of being able to visualize and uh use you know these lower dimensional structures uh to simplify things and um you know that's against what Ben loves uh and that and he he is saying oh good there's more complexity with the neuromodulatory story he's rubbing his hands together that's what you that's what you can't do on a audio only podcast to see that someone's rubbing their hands together so we're going to the complexity yeah so Ben alluded to this idea of like there's this is one of the hot topics now in the field that during a virtual conference meeting we also some some traces of it that there's a disconnect um between firing of dopamine cells and the amount of dopamine release Ben's laughing but um the idea is that I love it yeah that's it's been a few years now that we know that dopamine cells are not exactly your typical textbook cells that uh the amount of neurotransmitter here dopamine that they release is not a passive readout of the cell activity or the cell body activity I mean in your typical neuroscience textbook you read that cells fire action potentials and then proportion uh no to that they would dump neurotransmitter in their targets but uh when was the first study I forgot but even if you go back to some of the shortzes old stuff in from like 80s um people were suspecting that um if you get a brain slice where you cut out all dopamine cells to cell bodies and then you have just the processes in the stride of for example just cut it dump them in the trash uh and you stimulate that um you do an electrical simulation in same slice and you measure dopamine you would see dopamine release so there there are mechanisms and then later out in 2012 using optogenetics uh stepcrags lab and was joe cheer right I mean Roger Kachoe um and at the same time uh what they discovered is that if optogenetically you stimulate a certain type of internoranzin strato these are uh internoranzad released acetylcholine then you would get dopamine released in the stride of independent of firing of dopamine cells dopamine cells are like cell bodies are dead or cut them out through them in a trash and you stimulate these certain internoranz and you would get like dopamine released so this adds I think even more complexity that like what is the computational unit of the brain I mean is it like firing of doop of cells or maybe in this special case it's not that it's the amount of dopamine that's getting released or even maybe further I mean maybe we should reconsider about what computational unit of the brain is and think about like receptor activation because in the end if dopamine cells fire and there's no receptor to uh listen to them have they made any sound what about water because the brain's mostly water should we consider that the computational it's salt water right it's if it was water we wouldn't have we wouldn't be alive right it's salty water and it actually sells that have are trying to um get a shelter from that salty water and the gradient there I think is the hearts of computation there but I think it's the receptors yeah so yeah I mean this adds to the complexity that dopamine cells don't it's not enough just to record from dopamine cells and infer their function and but like during this Vita conference we saw like amazing results from Z-caliks lab Paul Kramer showed some amazing stuff in Changlu from Pascal Kaiser's lab showed like some another set of amazing results showing how the interaction between cold energetics and dopamine acts on terminals in the stride and would cause like dopamine release and we don't know yet but we're trying to like multiple groups now are trying to understand what are the functional meaning of this now added computation and I have my own speculations I mean it has something to do with like saving I mean now I'm just babbling saving like metabolic energy because I mean one reason one thought that I had was that like dopamine unlike other cells I mean the branching of dopamine is like maybe two or threefold greater than your typical cells so changing even the membrane potential would be like very metabolically costly being the computational studies out there that shows that the energy in terms of ATP required to bring dopamine like axon terminal potential is back to a resting potential is like much greater than your typical cells and it like exponentially increases with the number of branching and one reason is that maybe brain I mean I love this idea of evolution of like evolution of systems sitting on top of systems maybe at some point they were like easier or more simplistic mechanisms or agents lurking around the earth and they just needed dopamine to do this for reproduction everything or like two or three more things but then as things became more and more complicated brain learned to design this idea of let's do a local release of dopamine in this special circuits because this circuit maybe cares only about motivation so you don't need to broadcast dopamine all the way from mid-brain to an entire brain and then use all this energy to bring back all these terminals down to the resting membrane you design or you evolve this local mechanism for dopamine release I think this is a topic that maybe like 10 people care about entire universe so we should know lots of people care about it I actually think that you know both things are probably happening because even when we record from dopamine cells we see that not all dopamine cells do the same thing and so you can have that sort of complexity and then you can add to that the local circuit sort of independent modulation that Ali talked about to have another layer of complexity that even though different signals can be even then further sort of distributed further modulated in separate ways and that gives you a lot of control quote unquote that's kind of low-dit word about being able to do lots of different things with this type of of your model so I think that's a good thing again I like it yeah I'm going back to maybe your first question this is that I think I mean there are aspects of like their functions of the dopamine that are like essential to life like learning from rewards and a versions right so entire brain perhaps needs to be informed about this function that something good happens right that's what Matt said it's the whole brain is a deep RL system there you go the whole brain has to be informed but the whole brain is involved perhaps in deep RL but it's not but yeah I mean and there's work from like functional MRI stuff from like Karl Diceroth and others labs looking at reward signals or what prediction signals across the brain and you see that like brain is involved right so it makes sense to have a broadcast signal that would just send out these like alarms or like something good happens something bad happened right if you're the visual cortex perhaps you still need this if your motor cortex you need this but then there are like very specialized functions of dopamine that perhaps not every single circuit in the brain needs to care about right how to hold a thought in your memory perhaps prefrontal cortex wants to know that your visual cortex is I don't care about that let me do my job right so these maybe mechanisms evolve and I agree with Ben that yes I mean it's not that like there might be heterogeneity and there is like at least you know through his work and others that there's heterogeneity and responses but on top of that I want to propose that there might be a multitude of local regulation mechanisms for dopamine release that serve these specific functions that we are yet to discover yeah and that's you know I think that's what supported because even though there is heterogeneity in the activity of different cells when it comes to the big sort of salient behavioral um behavioral uh continuously like like reward or a version at least reward you can see that most dopamine cells really respond to it regardless of what they do in different time of epochs so certainly that's something that dopamine here seems to be specialized so even if they do other things as well that are more so segregated or heterogeneous all right guys well this is uh it what it what it was going to be at the beginning was a sort of cursory introductory reflective uh pre precursor to the dopamine panel and what it turned into which is what I thought it would do what it turned into is a full blown discussion that I think it's turned into a real nice complement because it was focused a lot on the actual dopamine that on neural systems and ideas around surrounding those things so then then the next little episode with the panel will focus more on that computational AI and behavior side so thanks again and uh thanks for having me again and this has been great thank you for having us yeah brain inspired is a production of me and you I don't do advertisements you can support the show through patreon for a trifling amount and get access to the full versions of all the episodes plus bonus episodes that focus more on the cultural side but still have science go to brain inspired dot co and find the red patreon button there to get in touch with me email paul at braininspired dot co the music you hear is by the new year find them at the new year dot net thank you for your support see you next time you