 One has to be humble about that. So do I think there's more to understand about our minds? Yes. Do I think that there's a pretty good principle foundation for some of the basics stuff? And let me repeat, some of the basics stuff? Yes. If you're in a talk about the creativity of a Mozart, have I discovered everything you need to know about that? No, I haven't. Will anybody stay tuned? You know, I hope someone is at least stimulated by these thoughts and just carry them directions I can manage. This is Brain Inspired. Hey everyone, it's Paul. On today's episode, Steve Grossberg joins me again. So Steve was on episode 82 when we talked a lot about his adaptive resonance theory and some of his principles that have guided him to a long and productive career. At the time, I didn't know it, but Steve was about to release a book and that book is now released. And the book is called Conscious Mind, Resonant Brain, How Each Brain Makes A Mind. And it is a tone of a volume which contains at least a nearly complete exposition of all of his theoretical principles and models and how those models account for brain function. And he describes how his models and the resonances in adaptive resonance theory account for our conscious experiences. As you'll hear, Steve, talk about you don't have to read the book, cover to cover. You can just pick any chapter and dive in because he repeats a lot of the same ideas and principles so that each chapter stands on its own. So on the episode today, we talk about some of those principles and I was also lucky enough to get a few questions from people like Yuri Buzaki, Jay McClelland, John Krakauer, and a listener, Matt. So those were fun to include and I hope you enjoy them. Show notes are at braininspired.co slash podcast slash 115. Alright, here's the conversation with Steve. Welcome back. How's it going? How have you been? Congratulations on the giant book that you've released into the world. Thank you, Alak. I then as well as one could hope in this crazy, pandemic world of ours. So let's hope everyone can stay as healthy as possible. Well, congratulations on the book. It is a we talked a little bit about it last time on your last visit to the podcast. And what you said is correct. It is large. It is a fully self-contained and quite of volume. So it was a big baby and I still have straight marks. Yeah. So I kind of want to know, you know, before we get into topics in the book, I'm kind of interested in, you know, just the process of writing it because in some sense, I think you must not have struggled too much to write it because it's kind of taking just your body of work and reorganizing it and putting it in book form. Did you struggle at all or was it a fairly quick process? How'd that go? Well, it was a process that was extended over quite a few years. So just to be self-contained, the book is my magnum of this. I have hundreds of articles and other contributions. But this is the biggie. It's called conscious mind, resonant brain. How each brain makes a mind. Then it's listed on Oxford University Press, which published it. But the main listing these days is on Amazon, where I managed to get it sold for ridiculously low price. Well, how I wrote it was over the years, quite a few of my colleagues had asked me to try to bring together my main discoveries in a book. And so because of that, I already had a draft of several chapters way back in 1999. Oh, wow. So it took a while. So what there were a number of things I didn't understand that I felt if this was going to be my big book, I really wanted to know a little about them. So I set that aside and worked for about 20 more years very hard with a number of gifted PhD students and postdocs to fill in some of those gaps. And like by 2018, I had told them some of the gaps, including the really big gap of how wherein our brains and even wives from an evolutionary perspective nature discovered conscious states, whereby we could see here, feel, and know things about the world and how these conscious states enable us to effectively plan and act to realize value goals. And so by 2017, I had published an article on the heart problem of consciousness and the natural network thing that was a piece of it. But then I also taught, excuse me, an advanced seminar in 2018 that was an integrative seminar about a lot of the concepts and other kinds of discoveries that my colleagues and I've made over the years. And in order to teach that course, I created many hundreds of color PowerPoints, lies. And if you look at the book, there are over 600 color figures. And those were PowerPoint slides in my lecture. So that was a huge help. But in addition, around that time, I became an emeritus professor. And so for the first time in my life, I didn't have to get research grants or to mentor up to 20 at a time PhD students and postdocs, then usually on 20 different topics, which was really exciting, but also quite exhausting. So I had free time. And so I had the foundation. And so I went forward to try to finish the book. And let me emphasize, I did write the book for a general audience. I wrote it to hopefully be self-contained and non-technical in a conversational style and wherever possible as a series of stories. And I started with perception at the front end, then move through cognition and emotion and finally to action. And I did it for both health and mental disorders. Moreover, I wrote it so the chapter could be written, couldn't be written, could be read on there all. But having to read the other chapter so if you're interested in perception and learning, read that first, if you're interested in how we walk or run, read that first, if you're interested in how our brains break down, to generate behavioral symptoms of mental disorders like Alzheimer's or autism or amnesia or post-traumatic stress or even problems of slow way sleep, you could read about that first. In some sense, it's like a giant reference book because just about any topic in cognitive sciences, you can look at it. And neuroscience literatures are vast and they go back 100 years. So I would say that this is a book that could thread a principled path through a number of the fundamental processes, which if you're armed with it, it'll make it much easier for you to read literatures. And in fact, that was true for my students. You know, the training they got from me, many people later on would say, well, how do you know all this? How do you jump into new areas so readily? And it's really because they had a principled foundation of knowledge. You can never know everything about anything in this world, but they had that foundation in the book tries to give you the foundation and what's paradoxical in a way about it. It's a serious book, but on the other hand, it's also a book written for a general audience because I believe that since we all have a mind, many people have been curious about what's going on in there. And I think this is perhaps one of the better sources of that kind of information that people can read about. And so I know various people who were friends in various walks of life who knew that I wrote the book and they bought it and they've been reading it and not everyone reads every chapter. But most of the people would read a good part of the book and it's very serious. I know there's at least one reading group that is dedicating months, I think, to going through step by step through the whole book and discussing it. So it is being, it's actively being read out there. Well, well, I'm delighted by that. And one of the big things that comes up in the book is how brain evolution leads to behavioral success. Behavioral success is what drives the evolution of our brains. It's just Darwinian selection applied to the mind. And so as a result of that, the theoretical method that led to all my results, I mean, an interesting little fact is that I started 17, I'm 81. I've been working for 64 years and I never hit a brick wall. Did we, you were 80 last time we talked? I guess you had a birthday. I guess it was over a year ago then. My birthday is on music. I know. Yeah, I couldn't remember how long it had been since we last spoke. So the pine flies. Yeah. But anyway, so I developed a very conservative theoretical method, which always begins with scores or hundreds of parametric psychological facts because it's on the level of psychology of behavior that drives the evolution of our brains. So if you want to understand, you know, the architecture that arose for evolution, you have to start with psychology. And fortunately, the literature in psychology is one of the largest in the history of science. It's over 100 years old. I mean, even great physicists like Helmfoltz Maxwell and Maas, in addition to doing physics, they did psychology and sometimes physiology. One of the things you talked about last time was using those large bodies of psychological data, behavioral data, and intentionally setting yourself up to have intention, different bodies of behavioral data that don't necessarily seem like they fit together, but you are trying to unify through principled means, unify and explain how these two, you know, how these various sets of data can hang together. Well, that is true, but what I think another way of looking at that is that if you are true to the demands of the data, and I mean, the art of modeling is you can have these piles of static curves of this versus that, and you have to go through a speculative leap to imagine how they could have arisen dynamically moment by moment in a mind, possibly even conscious mind. If you do that, if you can do that, that's the art of modeling, and that can help you to discover principles of organization, and those principles can force you into thinking about new kinds of data that you never even thought you'd know the first thing about. Like, you don't wake up in the morning someday and say, hey, today I'm going to understand about science. I mean, that came in through the back door. It came in through a study about how we learn to attend, recognize, and predict objects and events, and that came up through my discovery of that, the resonance theory, or art, which has become, I think it's fair to say, the leading, how the material theory of how we learn to attend, recognize, and predict objects and events in the change in the world. And I'm willing to say that with that embarrassment before the all of the foundational hypotheses of art, which is a art teacher at the presence of, have been confirmed by subsequent psychological and or biological data, and art's gone on to explain really hundreds of experiments. So I think talking about this brick wall and how we all want to be able to continue to introduce as we go through life, the question is why has art been so successful? And there are some fundamental reasons which are true throughout my work. And in this case, it's because I was able to derive art. In 1980, I had a very well-sided psychological review article that's still the leading theory journal on psychology. I derived art from a thought experiment. And you know, you may know Einstein in particular, Rosary James, for his thought experiments where he used them to help him derive the laws of general relativity, so-called elevator, but experiment, what a good experiment is, is one you thought deeply enough about the phenomena that you could see that there are a few simple facts behind it that are really driving what's going on. And here the thought experiment was about a universal problem of error correction that is as we're learning, how do we autonomously correct predictive errors? And I was able to show through the thought experiment that adaptive resonance theory is the unique answer, just using hypotheses that we all know about. You don't have to be a psychologist to know them. You know them because they're ubiquitous environmental pressures that we all experience throughout life, and when a number of them act together on evolution outcome, architectures like art. And in thinking about this, I want to comment that the thought experiment, these hypotheses never use the word mind or brain. Right. So in a sense, they are providing a universal solution to a certain important massive problems in what I find useful to quote, autonomous adaptive intelligence. You know how we're going to be understanding increasingly during this century autonomy in our science and technology. And we already see signs of it through effort to design self-driving cars, autonomous airplanes and the like. But the key point is that, you know, I know you want to talk a little about consciousness. I never tried to understand consciousness. It's just like you don't wake up in the morning and then you understand outside of these. You don't wake up in the morning and say, you understand consciousness. But I always wanted to understand how we learn. And you know, not the least reason being I was always a student and that's what I did. I was learning all day. Let me silence my phone. But the key issue that fascinated me about learning is how we learn so quickly without necessarily forgetting just as quickly. The stability plasticity, the plasticity stability dilemma. The plasticity dilemma so called, how can our brains be so plastic to learn quickly? Like, I learned your face for a time I saw you within a matter of seconds and I recognized you today, you know, a year later. So I learned quickly and I didn't experience catastrophic forgetting of your face due to the many other faces that I have learned or seen since just like when I learned your face, I wasn't afraid that it would somehow drive my mom's face out of my memory. And I called this solution to the stability plasticity dilemma. How we can learn so quickly without experiencing catastrophic forgetting or something which a lot of AI algorithms notably deep learning cannot do. They can experience catastrophic forgetting so that they're unliable and they're also not explainable in a technical sense. So they're not trustworthy. But let's get back to adaptive residency. We're what made it possible to solve this build plus this dilemma was I realized that you need in addition to the bottom up signals coming from the outside world, you need recognition categories that are going to be reading out learned top down expectations that are going to focus your attention on a subset of features that have been activated by bottom data. I call these the critical features. These are the ones that are going to be told for the fifth success and attention helps you to disregard the relevant features. And when there's a good enough match between the top down expectation that's being read out by the recognition category and the bottom up data, then you can go into a cycle of resonance between that category and those critical features. It sustains itself as a feedbacker long enough to create the state of resonance synchronizes the firing of the attended critical features and the selective recognition category long enough so that the adaptive weights in the bottom up filters and the adaptive weights in the bottom up expectation learn what they're looking at and that's what call an adaptive resonance. And this particular resonance between a pattern of features and a chosen recognition category is therefore called a feature category resonance. And after I did all that, it then occurred to me that the parametric properties of the critical features in different situations match psychological data about what you will recognize and I realized that a feature category resonance is supporting conscious recognition. And I got into consciousness and that way through the back door. And from then I was able to classify six different kinds of conscious resonance as just seeing here in Schillingian knowing and I also asserted that all conscious states are resonance states through this work but also noted that not all resonance states are conscious states and we're over this quite a bit of brain dynamics that aren't resonant. Yeah, I wanted to ask you why some resonances like you just said are not conscious and why some are. Is there a principled way to delineate which ones are and which ones aren't? Well, there's a simple way to do it. If you're resonating with critical features that represent either external quality like brightness or color or internal quality like fear or relief emotions, then that kind of resonance will support consciousness. But you can have resonance that doesn't include quality in them and the reason is that you have to dynamically stabilize a lot of stuff in the brain through resonance. That's only conscious quality. So a couple of resonance is that are not conscious or front or right over. So that is to say we have a quite a cortex that's very important in our representations of space and in the control spatial navigation among other things. And then we have our frontal cortex that's important in planning and you know you're working memory and all sorts of stuff there. And if they resonate, one of their roles, different resonances can control the opening or closing of gates in the basal ganglia which is a different part of the brain entirely and you have to open particular gates in order to enable a concept or a concept or an action to occur. That's how things are expressed. And if we know that how that can really muck up your life in Parkinson's disease, those gates aren't working properly and it can have both cognitive and emotional and motor effects on people of split between. Then one other if I can just, if you could bear with me just a moment more and I'll shut up. There are also enterinocate the temple cortices between the enterinocortex and the temple cortices and those are important in regulating the learning of enterline of grid cells and hitherto-campus, play cells that are terribly important in spatial navigation in telling us how we know where we are at a given moment and they don't have external or any kind of qualia and then either. But if resonance itself is the key mechanism underlying subjective experience, underlying consciousness, whether it's necessary but not sufficient. Not sufficient. Yeah. Because if you don't have critical features resonating that support external, internal qualia representations, then they won't be conscious. It's not that the principle of resonance is different. It's the content of the resonance that's particular. Okay. I'm going to have to chew on that a little bit more. Steve, I want to back up because I have a handful of questions from listeners and some people you know that I want to make sure we get to. So if you don't mind, I'm going to go ahead and start going through a few of those here. Sure. Good. So the first question that I'm going to ask is from Yuri Buzaki. He didn't send me audio, so I'm just going to read the question that he wrote. And actually, he gave a little blurb in your book. I love his work, I believe. He is a marvelous scientist and a delightful man. You know, he designed his own house that he recently had to sell. What is that? He designed his own house that he designed all the... He told me about that and or wrote me about it. And we're both crazy Hungarians. All right. Right. Oh right. You share the Hungarian, except your Huggie Kissy Stevie sometimes, which is not a Hungarian disposition, generally. It depends on the socio-economic status. Okay. All right. So Yuri, here's his statement in question. So the legacy of a great person is always judged by the community. Johannes Kepler didn't know about the four Kepler laws. Newton was the one who named him the Kepler laws. Sir John Eckles didn't think much about the EPSPs and IPSPs for which he got the Nobel. The community has the tendency to link one single discovery to one person. For example, Einstein and relativity, John O'Keefe and place cells. So Yuri says he's curious to know of your many, many findings, which one would you like to be remembered by? And can you say it in one sentence? Well, I'm now trying to say adapt to resonance theory because... What can I do? But adaptive resonance theory is the most... The real, really, because of what I just said about the central role of adaptive resonance theory in learning and consciousness and the fact that it could be derived from a universal thought experiment about error correction and to the extent to which one of the foundational properties of human intelligence and civilization is our ability to adapt to changing environmental conditions, the ability to solve the stability, plasticity, dilemma is absolutely foundational. So I think that the discovery and development of adaptive resonance theory may be one I could hitch my... What do we hitch to these things? Not horses. Like, hitch my lexas too. Oh, it's got to be a... You're a Tesla. How about Tesla? I don't own a Tesla. Okay. You're a lexas guy. All right. Moving on, this is from a listener, Matt, who asks, are there any mysteries or gaps in understanding of the mammalian visual system that keep you awake at night, that your various models like art, scan, 3D, laminate, and so on can't explain? Or do you consider them fairly complete? In either case, what parts do you think are most in need of experimental confirmation? Well, that's several very challenging questions, though, since I haven't given any background yet. Well, yeah, yeah, feel free. What keeps you up at night? What bothers you about, yeah, good. Well, I'm not kept up at night, but my mind does have scientific dreams. So I am quite capable of sleeping happily through the night. And more so when I was young, awake up in the morning, understanding something a little better than I did when I went to bed. Okay, man, that does not happen to me and I'm so jealous that people like you. Well, I think this would only happen with me if I were living with certain paradoxes. My ability to make discoveries always seem to be facilitated when in trying to understand data. I should say that if I have one really important gift that's being able to see the heart of the data, I have acquired technical ability to express the insights about the meaning of data so that it can be quantitatively modeled and tested. My main gift is really a visual and effective gift I see and feel about the meaning of data and that leads me to realize that certain facts, if they've used together from a certain conceptual perspective, created dilemma, you know, a paradigm. And they, the pressure of that paradox, like the noise saturation dilemma, the stability plus density of the limits, very dialectic. Once I can get that dialectic to go in, then I know I'm on my way to discovery, but it may take a long time and, you know, wake up no one more in the morning, but the reason that I sometimes did or do is that I would be creating these internal pressures in my mind by living with the data. And that's a good, one of the good things about starting work when I was 17. A lot of data has been discovered while I've been a scientist. So it's not like I had to go to school to know it. And quite often I predicted it, so I was just waiting for it. And so the data become my friends and they're going strong in my head when I go to bed at night. So are there are there sets of data that you're you're itching to explain that that you think about at night and then wake up a little bit closer to the answer? Well, well, I'm reluctant to talk about the things that I'm currently working on because, you know, sometimes you hit a brick wall and you realize there's something from the mental, you didn't realize you needed to know that you did and you put it aside and you might have to work 20 years or like I did with consciousness. They're not done with that. No one's done with that. Before you can come back to it. So I can tell you a paper, the topic of a paper I recently submitted to illustrate that what I am currently thinking about is not something you might predict right away from what I've already done. I did submit an article for publication about how we perform and learn music at variable rhythms and beats. So I got very interested in understanding. There are some aspects of music scientifically and of course no one paper can be more than, you know, put your toes in this vast ocean of mysteries. But so that paper is now under review. I have no idea whether I have the experience or if I'm going to play another question for you. If you're ready for it. Hi Steve's is John Crack out here. I have got your book. I have not read the whole thing but I'm getting the gist. So I have a question. I haven't been able to find a comparative section in your book. In particular, the difference between our closest relatives, the nonhuman primate chimpanzees and us based on your notions of laminar computation and complementary computation, what is the explanation for the huge gap cognitively between us and our closest nonhuman primates, what framework would you use to explain the difference? It seems like the nonhuman primates have all the components that will be needed to show the kind of cognition that we show. And I just don't see in your book an explanation for that difference. You can enlighten me. Thank you. All right. That was John Crack out. Well, John, you don't see it because I didn't write about it. And I didn't write about it because one I'm more interested in human minds and brains. But two other people have studied this kind of comparative difference. And two things that people have spoken about, I have nothing new to add. So I'm going to be very brief is where by pedal. And so we stand on two feet and we can use our hands in ways that were essential for the development of civilization and also our larynx is developed in a way that enables us to articulate a much wider range of sounds. And the combination of having the physical equipment to develop languages and the physical equipment to learn to use tools. Many people have written about the importance of these kind of adaptations. So it's not something necessarily in the brain that needs to be different. You're talking about different morphologies, different body parts and structures. Well I wouldn't say it quite that way Paul because our bodies and our brains are in a continual feedback loop. And then fundamental changes in our bodily components and capabilities will force evolutionary developments that will be in a kind of statistical equilibrium. That's why for example if God forbid you lose an arm and an axed ins there will be a remap in your cortex of the area that needs to control your arm. And it could be taken over by quite a different mental faculty but often one that's close to it on the cortical map where your limb representation was. So there is a feedback loop that maintains the dynamic equilibrium between body and brain and therefore mine. All right very good. I've got one more question here for you. Are you ready for it sir? I think you'll recognize this person. Oh Jay, hi Steve. Congratulations on your outstanding book. I have a question about the relationship between adaptive resonance theory and the dynamic flow of consciousness. I think of resonance as like settling into a kind of an attractor state but I also often experience a feeling of a dynamic flow. For example when I'm listening to Yo-Yo Ma play the cello or watching a tennis match in progress I have this experience of the flow of action rather than anything that's at all ever static. And I just wondered how you think about that from the point of view adaptive resonance theory. There you go. Jay McClellan. Well that is a very good question and no one ever said that resonances are static. I mean one you know a key issue is if you want to be able to learn something new you have to pay attention to it long enough for the resonance to drive changes in adaptive ways but movement control interacts with resonance in a very dynamic way. So in particular you know I was often struck when I would go from parking my car at the university to my office there was a long carada outside and at the end of the carada which might have been 50-75 feet away you might see someone walk test with a lot of bright sunlight behind them so they adjust the silhouette and you know I could recognize the person from one or two steps or even sometimes just from this silhouette. So resonances are dynamic and there's nothing in the concept that forces it to be static but you know whenever you are giving an exposition of concept you sort of start with the simple parts but nothing in the concept requires in fact it's very often the case in language that before you can get off the ground in a lot of dynamic behavior you have to study things like working memory how do we temporarily store sequences of events occurring in time so that we can learn to group them together into plans and skilled actions and so on and so forth and each of the items that are going into the working memory are active for a very short amount of time so the resonance is continually being reset that's why no lesson important concept in art than resonance is what happens when you get a big enough mismatch the mismatch triggers a reset and a memory search or hypothesis test it now in the case of storing sequences and working memories to control sequential dynamic behaviors which is part of what I think Jay may have in mind all that you're really doing is mismatching a momentary resonance you know a certain pattern came in it grabbed the category starts to resonance relayed out of there the next pattern comes in causes a mismatch only because you were resonating on the previous category but what Gale Carpenter I proved to get direct access to the rep to the category for the new pattern if it's familiar and so there's no deep search here you just have resonance we said resonance we said resonance we said store store store store store learn learn the question is how do we discover what combinations of sequentially stored items are going to be predictive to determine what we should do next and one of the chapters I forget maybe with chapter 13 discusses that in particular why and how not everything that's happening may be stored in that working memory but only things that are test relevant at that moment so it's not just art in the simple sense of category learning in fact if you go forget which chapter well have my book here yeah go ahead and I maybe I can show you the figure so that figure is on page 5 when the in my book is called the predictive order architecture and what that shows is that on the one hand adaptive resonance in the simple of sense that J was mentioned in concern that is not sufficient which it doesn't please not up that kind of resonance goes on an infertemporal cortex in particular a steered infertemporal cortex by the time you get to anterior infertemporal cortex is just one more brain region you can learn in very an object categories thus to say I could recognize false face from different angles different orientations different positions in the scene without having to learn all of those examples so it solves this big cometatory explosion problem but everything else in that whole architecture is doing other stuff it's organizing sequential events in time it's providing evaluation of them through reinforcement on the motivation it is pre-processing them through perceptual multiple perceptual stages to do what I call a logical resolution of uncertainty so you know like the retinal image we get if one work is vision it's very incomplete because we have a huge blind spot where all the retino veins come together on the optic nerve so it's blind and as big as the photosensitive fovee and you have nourishing veins that are covering the whole retina to keep up with that incredibly transmittableism so there are a lot of places on the retina that don't receive a light signal and yet we are not aware of that and it's crucial that we complete the representation because otherwise there would be big gaps in our representation which we couldn't look at or reach to and that has survival consequences and that takes a lot of processing stages I call a chiral resolution of uncertainty and then if you were to well how do you know what stage representation is complete enough to base action on it whether looking or reaching that's when you have a surface-row resonance that creates a state of controversy and then you use that visual representation that you're consciously to direct your actions but all that stuff is just a small part of the brain it's just individual objects and when you're dealing with motion you know it's a whole different stream so you have you have to integrate all this information through time so I totally agree with Jay and the book does what it can to describe processes you're doing that but every chapter starts um the novel I try to make itself contain I could have written a second book based on the first book for more advanced oh yeah the patience but what I agree with Jay but but if you go to page 5 when he is the book and the predictive art literature and read that chapter you'll see that there's a lot going on to enable us to integrate events sequentially in time and etc so important dynamically changing experiences for humans include understanding speech and music and to do this we solve what's called the cocktail party problem this problem arises because auditory communication often takes place in an environment with multiple sound sources that are active simultaneously like when we talk to a friend at a noisy party but despite the noise we can often track our friend's voice even though harmonics from other speakers voices may overlap those of our friend we can do this because our auditory system can separate multiple overlapping sound sources into distinct mental objects or auditory streams this process was called auditory scene analysis in the classical 1990 book by Al Pregman by isolating and tracking a single voice or instrument in a noisy situation we can understand what's being said or played but that raises the question how do we do this when speech or music is intimately included by noise as in a noisy party I introduced the art stream model in 2004 with reclaborators to explain how this happens art stream applies basic art principles and mechanisms in the auditory domain including the art matching rule for top-down attentional focusing and resonant conscious hearing it's also quite remarkable that art stream includes neural designs that also help to explain seemingly quite different competences such as how do humans represent and understand what's called place value numbers place value numbers are numbers like a hundred a thousand and so on other animals can represent small numbers in order to forage for food but only humans can represent large numbers like two thousand there you go Jay thanks thanks everyone who submitted questions so Steve going going back to John crack ours question I just kind of had a follow-up question I'm curious if you think that there are any undiscovered yet to be discovered principles that we will need to to account for the nature of our human like higher cognitive thought right our our ability to think you know other animals they can't think we can think right are there undiscovered principles that that we might need to elucidate those or different math like one of the things that we talked about last time is right first let me let me try to first get to what you just asked because of course the whole fine of discovering something is new you don't know what I'm doing for sure so that's all I could say about that another more general way of saying that is I never could predict the present so I can predict the future so and I think that's one has to be humble about that so do I think there's more to understand about our minds yes do I think that there's a you know a pretty good principle foundation for some of the basic stuff and let me repeat some of the basic stuff yes so and I depend on that I like for example I mentioned art and music if you're going to talk about the creativity of a Mozart have I discovered everything you need to know about that no I haven't will anybody stay tuned one of the things we talked about last time and you go through this history in the book as well was the need for a new kind of mathematics to start to explain processes in our minds and brains and the division between physics and you know essentially biological sciences and so one you know one of the things that you spend a lot of time a lot of time doing is inventing these new mathematics looking at the dynamics and the different using differential equations to model these things and I'm curious if you think you know building on that last question and I you know I'm hazarding this because I think I know what your answer is going to be but do you envision needing a further new mathematical approach or do we have the mathematical tools now to understand to go further and understand thoughts and the like well again I see that this is the kind of thing that is inherent to the discovery process in my life all of my work was driven by a passionate involvement with large amounts of data do I now see lots and lots of data that I feel I don't understand the way I felt I didn't when I was doing it and the answer generally no so much of the data I hear what's seen today I can say yes well I could see you know that's a variation of that to demonstrate it in a rigorous theoretical model with all two geometric simulations would take three to five years with a collaborative theme do I have time to do that I don't but do I feel that that's something sufficiently novel in a comfortable way that I want to really study it rarely and when I do come upon such a piece of data I do jump in with both feet but really for my personal enlightenment and if I then feel I can write something about it that's sufficiently clear that people might understand what I'm trying to say and finally so as a first step or more quantitative work I will do so but no I don't feel that there's a ton of phenomena out there that you know basic experiments when it comes to eye forms of creativity you know like a Mozart or a casserole oh yes there's so much but what's the data right you can't build theories without data and so at some point if there aren't enough data you can try to gain qualitative insight and and personal satisfaction but that isn't doing science anymore as to new kinds of math there are new kinds of math being continually discovered often they get increasingly abstract some right greatest discoveries the 20th century were codifying and unifying and algebraic eyes and insights that originally came from nature you know people like Alesson Mimon you know start with catography you know stuff like that and as they get further and further from nature one can wonder what extent they will have the kind of power you want but but then you know you go to high-energy physics and you have string theory which builds in you know there are new mathematical challenges there so as nature forces us to discover concepts that we can use to understand natural phenomena I think that has been a very rich resource some parts of mathematics have already done that death but of parts are still moving along but you know what I'm hoping is that especially as computer resources get better and better that more and more mathematical concepts and tools can be used to start helping with societal problems and we see that in ways we take for granted like the daily weather report there's no weather reports predictive models that's math you know we didn't have that there was a time when you wouldn't want to predict more than a day or two in advance right right now with all the turbulence to the global warming the models aren't quite as good anymore because it's so nonlinear and so turbulent you know they'll probably need to define and sure the developmental models but you know what we're doing now with Google all of this you know came out of mathematical watch and then there are going to be analog computation that are more human-like which will I think in human or robots who have more analog or computation that can be embodied in manno skill the LSR chips to embody the increasingly human kind of intelligence along with you know advanced variations of online and computation to compute at unbelievable speeds the kind of things you can't do very well like multiplying huge matrices or another layer and so we'll have these kind of hybrid kind of intelligence I think in future mobile adaptive robots and other intelligent machines. I want to switch gears I'm aware of our time and I I have a couple of questions that I I want to make sure that we get in and then if if we can if there's time after we can dive into any any of the topics in the book that you'd like to talk about you know one of the things you emphasized in the last time that we spoke was how appreciative you are for having been able to have a long productive continuous career since you were 17 right essentially when you began one of the things I want to know is how you got so damn lucky to to know your calling so young and and to know how to implement it and but really what I'm wondering is how important it is to have like early life not just a calling necessarily but early life foundational ideas and and successful you know in your case models right for how important that is to have it early on to have later on an impactful contribution to the field like an old guy like me can't I couldn't begin now in a new field and have an impactful contribution right well you know I'm blocking now but some of the most I almost got it some of the greatest through mathematicians came to math relatively but I thought math in particular was one in which youth serves well well they were all counter examples that are so vivid that they were counter examples okay people who both in France and Germany some of the greatest mathematicians who started later they're also you know for example when you start very often depends on how much knowledge you need before you can even know how to describe a problem that's of interest so in the old days number theory was a great field to start young in like Fermat you know because you could say how many ways are there to do this and this and there was no literature but now one of the most abstract theories of to mathematics is number theory so even to know what people care about now you'd have to study yeah yeah so you know the accessibility of the phenomena so that's why I was so lucky I might have mentioned you know I grew up in New York City and in New York there were only basically buildings people and pets and so people always fascinated me and then when I took introductory psychology as a freshman and I realized that there was a quantitative database about how people learn I was all in but it took more than that because I was also very lucky I I always worked very hard in school because my parents didn't have money so I had to win scholarships so I and you know I met Jewish and there was a Jewish quota only very small fraction of Jewish boys from New York again funding to go to the college out of town although C1Y is a great place to win the million of the world and of course girls couldn't get money at all yeah and and so I chose to go to Dartmouth not only because of good things I read about Dartmouth and notably I read there was a senior fellow program where in your final senior year you could do research but also because I was a competition machine in high school I went to stivocene I had to be first to go to scholarship and you know competition can become an end in itself and I needed to switch from working to compete to working for love because I love what I was doing and when I went to Dartmouth I was able to make that transition but I was lucky too um the chairman of psychology without a store or the chairman of mathematics with John Kimmy's I worked like a dog at Dartmouth to be confirmed in my class and professors would pass around my final exams because they were so notorious I was so over there and so I got to the attention of people who could help me get a senior fellowship and therefore I became the first joint major in mathematics and psychology at Dartmouth and launched my life there and in fact it's quite a wonderful symbiosis due to Kemeny in part that the new psychology in their buildings at Dartmouth and have joined it but they were both remarkable men how has stuff became a provost and vice president Stanford he was much loved I read and John Kemeny was a co-development co-developer of the computer language basic and also of time sharing computer networks he was also one of Einstein's assistants so I always felt that I was you know in the presence of something really quite transcendent when I was interacting with John Kemeny the last time we talked also you express the notion that the biological sciences have really lacked or lagged rather in mathematical and computational analyses right but you know from my perspective so my PhDs in quote unquote computational neuroscience and it seems like these days if you don't have a model you can't do anything you can't get published anyway and I'm curious whether you think that you know math and modeling has sort of caught up are they up to speed now with experimental training in the neurosciences and beyond well in my experience it's very difficult for a student to learn enough data to really you know live with it for passionately in days or that and enough relevant technique to know how to model with it. Most departments or mainly experimental they might have a smattering of methods some departments like Prudempel and the department of mathematics and statistics of the you where I've been a possessive in many of them now. Emeritus there's a very fine group in studying the statistics of neural experiments, no physiological experiments but they don't model what the meaning of the data are they're just trying to show you know how to how to statistically analyze very noisy and complete data which is what needs. But outside in the broader field do you see an increase in the appreciation for and the training for computational and modeling techniques? Well I think certainly I can't track a whole world and I do believe the European program does have a center in paradise. I don't know what they teach in my own experience in the past usually people teach what they want students to know to work in their lab and that's not what we taught. We not only taught in those 18 courses stuff that had been discovered in our department we try to prepare our students whatever job they would get in the broader field of psychology, neuroscience technology, biological research, technology and that's why they did so well. I see very little of that and part of the reason is that a lot of the people never learn that stuff in school, a lot of the leaders and that's it takes an enormous political effort for people who don't know the work to try to hire younger people who can teach it, we'll learn it in that teacher. The funding and academia is very difficult especially because of the research lab. So there were all sorts of social political factors. The answer is no, not being done at the best of my knowledge. All right. And if I'm wrong, I want to know because it makes me feel much better. So Steve, we're coming up on the end and I want to ask one more meta question about the book itself, the book itself. So Terence Deakin wrote this book called In Complete Nature and it is a difficult read and is long and one of his colleagues actually then I think because of that wrote kind of a summary, short summary book that someone could even use as an introduction to the larger volume. Your book is not like In Complete Nature in that, I mean, it's different in many ways but it is long and does take time and like you said the last time we spoke, people don't have attention spans anymore and people have very little time. So I'm curious if you thought about having, you know, seeking either writing yourself or seeking out someone else to write, you know, just as condensed as possible a short volume that could almost be a companion piece or an entry way into the larger piece. Well, keep in mind that really, depending on who you talk to, the book really first thought it really being distributed in July and now it's the middle of September. So the book is really very new. Oh yeah, sure. And and I'm very much engaged with people who were writing me and asking me about this and that, you have a thing. Do I think that I would have the energy to write a short of thing myself? At first that was what I was going to do and then I had, you know, feeling bend it on that. But what I had been thinking which may be useful. See, this book came out of a course. This is the book. It's based on my lectures. Yeah. And the prerequisites to take my course were zip. Kids took my course who weren't in psychology or neuroscience. I had studies who were artists in my course and they got a lot out of it. Now, did they understand everything that we talked about? Well, do students ever understand everything? I remember sitting with a young colleague of mine years ago, I had just given a lecture and we were on the train together. Must have been in New York going to the same direction. So you know, when you give the lecture, everything seems so clear, so lucid in my mind. But as a fan of time, it just made it easy. And we spoke about the fact that and he said, that's why I like hearing you lecture on the same thing more than once. But the same thing is true with the book. You know, the book is written to be independent chapters. That is to say independent lectures. Yeah. That were given to kids who knew nothing. And you pick what interests you and you take your time with it and don't try to read everything, read what interests you. I am thinking, though, that I might try to make it useful as a course book by putting making a little bit of exercise. Like a textbook, essentially. So that it could be used to teach a class. Now that in itself is a challenge. But you know, it's not going to replace a required course because there's blood involved and getting courses through a required curriculum. And people don't want to shed anymore blood, but there are electives. And this is the kind of elective that I think could fascinate people. None of these kids came to my course with no book. Now, if they came to a course by any teacher, they would have the book. And don't say, well, that they didn't write the book, because I know that when I became an assistant professor at MIT of mathematics, the first courses I taught I never learned the subject. And I'm not the only one. So you read the book and you learned the book. And then everyone says, including my PhD advisor, John Colorado, very famous and wonderful mathematician. He said, that's the only way you can learn anything in mathematics. You have to teach it. So I want to make it easy to use my book and an elective course. Oh, it's a good idea. I think that's actually a great place to end it. So I want to say again, congratulations on the book. I hope it continues flying off the shelves. Well, I don't know if it is flying off the shelf. Oxford hasn't told me. Really? I've flown off the shelf. I keep asking how many? How many? Oh, you should look at Twitter. I've seen a lot of people posting photos of the book. And you know, like I told you about that reading group and stuff. So I know that it's getting distributed pretty well, at least in my, from my small narrow viewpoint, I suppose. Well, I'm relieved to hear it. I do think the book, because it does try to talk about things concerned, the human condition, you know, like the last chapter where it talks about yes, biological basis of creativity and religion and morality and why superstition and self-defeating beliefs persist so much in certain social environments. I think there are lessons that a lot of people might find what's about. That was actually one of my favorite parts of the book was toward the end there when you are relating the short-term memory and long-term memory laws to for brain function and processing to biological phenomena. Because the universe still developed mental coupled. I love the example of how going from a to a gaspula primitive to that, you know, at two sides of the blastula cells become active. And one of them starts growing a pathway, which then becomes adhesive to the other cells. And so that's a kind of long-term memory. The activity is like short-term memory. The growth of the connection, which happens in our brains too, the genesis, and then dynamically stabilizes itself. And then there's a very ancient homologue between nerve cells and muscle cells. Well, this connection is like a muscle it pulls and it pulls the cells closer to the interpretive form of the gaspula, which was short-term memory, long-term memory interaction. Now, that's just a comment, and I first published it in 1978 in an article I call Communication Memory and Development. I'm in a title like that. You know that, you know, I'm going to be doing a little speculation, especially in 1978. But those concepts I don't think have still been investigated with what we now have are amazingly more powerful biological methods than imaging methods and living tissue. You know, I call someone, you know, is at least stimulated by these thoughts and just carry the directions I can imagine. How's Gail? She's good. She's good. Okay, good. I just wanted to make sure. I was going to ask you about working, you know, having, getting to work so closely with someone who's also the love of your life. Well, it's a blessing if you can get it. But you know, I mean, she is a lover of my life and my best friend. And one of the wisest people is I've ever met. But you know, also when you're both working together in the same house and on sometimes on the same project, you know, in my work, I always wanted to be intellectually ruthless, but emotionally supported to my students because, you know, you're not doing anyone in a favor. If you say, you know, to their favorite idea, which is a lump of garbage, oh, very interesting, very interesting. Right. You know, it's important to try to not attack it, but to use it as an opportunity to say, you know, what may not be correct there and then to use that as an opportunity to move in a maybe productive direction, keeping in mind that, you know, a person is giving you their heart on the hand by giving you this personal idea. So that's a very important, but when you're working at home, and you're both incredibly powerful thinkers and passionately engaged, it can sometimes get heated. No. And my other thing is, data and I realize the big mistake is to not only not work together, but not to answer our telephone after dinner because students and other colleagues were calling us up this as questions well into the night. So we had to have ground rules and it worked out really well, but Gail has done a lot of work solo and with other collaborators, Desavayan. In both our case, a lot of our most foundational work, what a solo work where we've broken it totally, but where we have very productive interactions were developing a series of algorithms and architectures that are very much using technology among other things. So it just goes to show why we never hit a brick wall because we were true to the method and we were, you know, not trying to do anything with a clue which we would expect to be data. So it's open. No brick walls for me, I hope. No brick walls. Well, Steve, keep staying true and carry on and be well and thank you for the time today. And thank you for your interest. I appreciate it. Brain inspired is a production of me and you. I don't do advertisements. You can support the show through Patreon for a trifling amount and get access to the full versions of all the episodes plus bonus episodes that focus more on the cultural side but still have science. Go to braininspired.co and find the red Patreon button there. To get in touch with me, email Paul at braininspired.co. The music you hear is by the new year. Find them at the new year.net. Thank you for your support. See you next time. Found the splin' page. Let me into the snow. The covers of the past that take me wherever I go.