 I mean, it was really bad. And there are very few cases I could point to and I pretty much put them all in the book of where I had a good teacher who actually taught me something useful that I remember to this day. At the beginning I just said, hey, you can design your own experiments and you get to build your own equipment. You know, they're like, what do I do? You know, I don't know what to do. Honestly, that was the only time I can think of in college where I was actually enjoying myself. Whoa, this is like a little miniature brain here. This is Brain Inspired. Hey, it's Paul. I'm still in the spirit of celebration here on the podcast. So for episode 101, I asked Steve Potter to come back on. That is, Steve Potter from episode number one. And it happened that he has written a book about his experiences teaching neuroscience and neuroengineering to college students while also running his neuroengineering research lab. We talked about his research way back when on episode one, he's done a lot of work growing and studying cultures of active populations of neurons, brains in dishes as one listener put it. So we begin the episode talking more about brains in dishes and kind of freeform about a variety of topics like brain organoids, artificial intelligence, alternative mechanisms of plasticity, mind uploading and other things. And then we go on to talk about his teaching experience and advice as laid out in his book. The book is called How to Motivate Your Students to Love Learning. And it's a memoir as much as it is a how to guide. So lots of stories intermixed with a lot of advice. So Steve took teaching quite seriously and he approached it like he's approached other pursuits in his life by a combination of constant iteration through trial and error and feedback, a lot of feedback constantly trying to improve students learning experience by understanding how to motivate them. And a core principle that emerged through his experience was how valuable it is to do real world learning projects, things outside the classroom that impact the real world, examples like writing Wikipedia articles, writing Amazon book reviews and other projects. It's almost like a way to give students a taste of what life in a lab might be like where you're discovering and working on projects that are full of unknowns. This is actually quite relevant to brain inspired listeners. So I know that many of you listen because the study of intelligence is almost like a hobby or a deep secondary interest. So the advice in Steve's book is especially applicable to you for teaching yourself how to get the most out of your own learning and make sure you're keeping yourself motivated. And I know that many others of you listening are faculty or postdocs or graduate students and you're either already teaching or mentoring or you will be soon. So in that regard, Steve's book is a great resource and a playbook for motivating your students to learn. Beyond that personally, and you'll hear me talk about this, reading the book connected much of my own past, good and mostly bad learning experiences, making me reflect and appreciate the best teachers that I've had and how valuable they were to me. So I really recommend the book. It's a little different than what we usually talk about. I found myself just breezing through it because it was so engaging and just struck record with me personally and it's just a really easy fun read that literally lists many resources and has lots of templates in it for the things that Steve has discovered works well through his own experience teaching. So I linked to the book in the show notes at braininspired.co-podcast-sla-101. Oh yeah. And if you're a student out there not enjoying one of your classes, maybe you can just sort of hint at your instructor. Hey, maybe you should go check out Steve's book. Alright, thanks for listening and here's Steve. 101. You're on episodes one and two, but wow, it's been a great long and wonderful trip for me and I'm looking forward to the next 100 or 200 or so. And thanks for coming back on the show again. Thanks, Paul. This is a great honor. I love this podcast and what you're doing with it. And so let's see where this one goes. Well, let's get right into it. So last time we talked, we talked a lot about your laboratory life and culturing neurons and recording and stimulating and creating a closed loop system where you can actually train the neurons to do a few things like train simulated animals called animates and hybrids and then use the activity of the output activity of the neurons to then figure out how to electrically stimulate the dish again. So it was a closed loop system. Really interesting stuff. And are you still giving talks about that material? I am, you know, I talked to the carbon copies.org foundation about brain emulation and talked a little bit about that stuff. I think you listen to that. We're going to talk about that in just a minute. And and I gave a talk in remotely in Iran recently. They had a nice brain symposium where I talked all about that. And I think the among that stuff, you know, the our most recent work where we closed the loop not only with electrical stimulation, but also optical optogenetic stimulation was was in my opinion some of the best work done in my lab. This was John Newman and being fake, Fong's work in and that's that is still worth talking about a very current topic. And happy to help anybody else out who wants to go down that path. Well, it was brand new when you were doing it. And it's still it's very hot topic still. I mean, it hasn't gone away, obviously, yeah, calcium imaging stuff. I came across. So I want to talk about culture neurons for just a minute before because we have a lot of other things to talk about. But I don't know if organoids or what I don't the brain organo organoids were a thing when you were developing your your cultured neurons. Do you know what that is? And I'm just wondering like on your overall thought on, you know, how they compare to using cultured neurons and what they, you know, if they are even comparable and just your overall thoughts on using organ organoids to study brains. Yeah, their quick answer is very much comparable organoids hit the scene probably in the, you know, early 2010s, I guess. They originally were called hanging drop cultures because of the way that you grow them in a drip, the hanging underneath. And I know, no, who coined the term organoids that when they, I guess it was when they sliced one open and they saw that it had differentiated into different types of, you know, micro anatomy. They said, whoa, this is like a little miniature brain here. And it got a lot of press. And I wouldn't say that's unjustified. However, a lot of people got the interpretation or the impression that this was all brand new that nobody had ever grown brains in culture before. Well, you know, there's a long history of people growing neural tissue and culture, both slices, organotypic slices. And in our case, it was mostly dissociated cultures, but I should say that when you do that, they spontaneously organize themselves whether they're growing on a flat surface or floating in a hanging drip or whatever. So I don't see any real functional difference between the organoids that are so popular right now and the cultures that we grew, which were not just a single cell layer thick, they were at least, you know, usually five layers thick. And sometimes they would clump up into balls that were exactly like organoids. And the problem is that if they get bigger than about 100 microns in diameter, whether they're growing on a substrate or in a drip or whatever, the tissue inside starts to die, it becomes an acrotic from the lack of diffusion of nutrients and also the lack of removal of the waste products. So nature solved this problem with blood vessels. And in culture, you don't have blood vessels, so you need some way of dealing with that. Organotypic slices are typically grown on a permeable membrane that allows nutrients to come through from below and from above and gases from above. The organoid cultures, if you read the literature, you'll see they are dying in the middle. You know, they tend to be an acrotic in the middle and you have a certain amount of time before you've got something which is kind of rotten. So we tried to deal with this. I was actually part of a big multi-group grant led by Steve DeWorth at Georgia Tech that was a bioengineering research project grant from NIH. So it had big funding to make three-dimensional cultures with an artificial circulatory system. So we were collaborating with people who build microstructures at Georgia Tech that were going to be little pipes that were going to perfuse liquid through the middle of a big 3D culture. And we got somewhere. We did make some progress, but I have to say in five years, we did not solve this problem. Were they like little carbon nanotubes that they were? They were like that. Yeah, they were actually made out of a parallel and a few other different polymers that you can deposit by chemical vapor deposition, you know, all the sorts of microfabrication techniques. Very sophisticated microfabrication. Some of it was etched silicon. These guys Bruno Frazier was one of them. Ari Glazer was one of them. Who else? There's another guy on the grant. Anyway, very good engineers who do microfabrication were involved in the project. And we just really weren't able to make a 3D culture that was more than 100 microns. They survived thanks to all the technology we could throw at it. So anyway, that's a very long answer to your question about what do I think about Oregon? I think they're very exciting because they are a great and vitro model that you can play with and do all sorts of interesting things. One of the most exciting things about them that I heard is that you can make them from stem cells. You can take stem cells and if you're clever about how to differentiate them and what things, what hormones to throw on them, you can get them to differentiate into different types of tissues to represent different parts of the brain. In our culture dishes, we didn't get that sophisticated retrying to differentiate stem cells. We always got the tissue from embryonic rats. So they were already pretty much differentiated into neurons. And then you guys would essentially shake them up and then let them diffuse into these dishes. But then they would immediately, once they recovered there, immediately start forming connections and retracting their spines, reaching out, retracting. But this was all on a two-dimensional grid as well so that you could record and stimulate, which is different than an organoid as well. And I don't, you know, are there advantage? I'm really quite ignorant about what organoids are used for and what their potential is. Aside from, you know, I know a little bit about wanting to study the sort of natural structure that emerges when I had no idea they were formed in these drops, as you said. And it seems like they have a few different uses relative to brains and dishes. Yeah, there are people who are trying to instrument them with lots of electrodes. Yeah. I think there are probably people who are trying to do optical recording from them as well. The key thing is that you have a cultured system that's a lot simpler than any mammalian brain out there. It's not simpler than some other brains, you know, you can look at C. elegans, a little worm that's got quite a bit simpler brain than any organoid. But for a lot of people, the benefits of having actual mammalian neurons there mean a lot to them. And in the case of organoids, you can grow them from stem cells that they got from humans. So you can actually have a real human tissue there. We could have done that with our culture dishes as well. We are offered human tissue from my neurosurgeon friend who routinely cuts people's brains up and takes bits out that are causing epilepsy. We decided that that was too fraught with ethical considerations that people might be upset about. The differences between human brain cells and rat brain cells when put in a culture dish are so minimal that we didn't worry about our level of science was not there yet. Well, your cultures would just develop epilepsy anyway. They would, exactly. Yeah. So cultures, whether they're from healthy tissue or not, start to get epileptic, which is an issue that we dealt with quite successfully. So the other thing that I wanted to ask about just harking back to our earlier conversation from a couple of years ago, with the deep learning revolution, you have these model networks. And a lot of people are quote unquote opening the black box trying to create explainable AI, come up with explanations of what's happening in the hidden units, ways of representing the information flow and what is being represented at different layers in the network. So it may be a silly question to ask about what the potential is to create artificial or create cultured and vitro networks like you had on a finely structured substrate, where you could almost set them up like a artificial neural network or set up something akin to like an artificial neural network and then compare between the two, train and compare between the two. And I know that you guys trained your in vitro networks and got to like a, I guess you'd say limited success, but we're able to train and then the networks could forget, would forget over time once you stop the training regime, but there was a limited amount of success with that. But is it completely invisible, infeasible to compare, to create something in a dish and compare it to an artificial network? What, there are many different kinds of artificial neural networks out there. We have a couple of good papers in which we used artificial neural network simulations. The Zainus Chow was the first author. Let me see if I can find one of those to mention. So this is from a journal called Neuroinformatics in 2005. It's called Effects of Random External Background Stimulation on Network Synaptics Stability after Tetanization, a modeling study. And what he did was he took a thousand neuron model of integrate and fire neurons. He's basically using his ekevages equations, I believe, for the model neurons. And we had inhibitory neurons and excitatory neurons in there and use those to develop the kind of plasticity experiments that we were also doing in our culture networks. So this is a model artificial neural network. So it fits what you just asked about. However, it's nothing like the kind of deep learning networks that you do back propagation with. So it's a very different thing than that. And there are people like Bruce Wheeler who we collaborated with who we're trying to actually create a very structured connectivity in vitro. In other words, to say I want this neuron to connect to this neuron and we'll call this the input layer and this the hidden layer and this one the outer layer. And we never did that. We never tried to pattern the substrates in any way to get them to connect up in a certain way. We felt and I think this is still true that we just don't know enough about the rules of how real neurons connect that we could dictate that. That doesn't stop you from trying. You know, you could be like Bruce Wheeler and try and just see what happens. Well, obviously you wouldn't be able to back propagate and train the network the same way either. So there are lots of limitations like you say there are so many differences. Yeah, but I don't think it's completely foolish idea. I just think that it's probably a misguided goal because we're working with such a different kind of network. The artificial neural networks that most people are using, I would say the people that are doing deep learning. I don't want to it really is important to make a distinction between the kind of folks who are trying to simulate brain tissue and give the dynamics that brain tissue has versus the people who are trying to do AI and are much more brain inspired, I would say, than emulating brains. Those types of neural networks are so non-biological and most importantly, I think they're not very complicated. It's like suppose you were trying to model a factory, a Tesla factory to make Tesla cars and all you did was get a big warehouse and put 100 or 200 lathes in there. No other tools whatsoever and they're all the exact same lathe. Okay, great. A lathe is a great tool. You can cut things with it. You can make round things with it, but a hundred of them that are all identical do not make a factory. What the brain is is much more like a real factory with its complex assortment of tools and complicated interactions between the workflows and the factory is so much richer in its complexity and what it can do that it's amazing that the deep learning networks have managed to do what they've done with these repetitive all the same neurons that they just they hook them all up and I guess basically the complexity comes in the learning process. If you pop tons of data through that very repetitive homogenous substrate of an artificial neural network, then it develops its own complexity in terms of the connectivity, but it's just not anywhere near as complex even as a you know, cultured dish of neurons or a brain-organoid. Well, you know, one of the complexities that's missing of course is artificial neural networks are glial cells and I know that you're a fan of glial cells and you've I can't recall if you mentioned it on the last time that you were on the episode one, but you and I think this is in the special hundredth episode, but you rue the fact that no one or very few people that talk about the other kind of plasticity which is action potential conduction velocity plasticity which is governed a lot by glial cells in the myelin that wraps around the axons and I know that you saw dynamics in the calcium signals signals and glial cells in your dishes and I'm wondering if you think that glial cells are still getting the short shrift or are they getting more attention that they deserve now? I think they're definitely still getting this short shrift. There are a few people across the world who do appreciate the possible, the very likely role that glial cells might play in learning and memory. You know I spoke with Mike Merzenick one time after hearing him give a talk about he you know he's done amazing things including basically inventing cochlear implants, but you know lots of stuff about auditory physiology and auditory plasticity and he showed data about how learning causes changes in the thickness of various white matter tracks so for instance corpus close and more than or the visual tracks depending on what kind of learning you're doing you know they and they're looking at data from structural MRI scans. So this is kind of where we're at now this is this is so crude we're at the millimeter scale here of saying this white matter track changed its size when somebody learns how to navigate taxis through London or whatever. That's great, but it says nothing about mechanism. Donald says is there's plasticity and white matter. Now that's just myelination. I think it's much more interesting to look in the gray matter and I know there's a few groups like in Japan I can't remember the name of them but they're looking at glia that sit right next to the cell bodies of neurons in the gray matter and they influence the cell's decision to fire an action potential or not. They're right there at the action hill and influencing somehow we don't really know how whether these things fire and when they fire and what thresholds they fire and I suspect they're also influencing a lot of the branch point failures you know as a signal propagates down a branchy neuron whether it's in the axonal arbor or in the dendritic tree there it doesn't always propagate sometimes it just stops and that has a lot to do with the recent history of that part of the neuron and it has to do with the ions around the neuron and it has to do probably with the glial cells that are around the neuron. That's my guess. So the answer is no it's not getting enough credit and you know it's a historical reason that glial cells don't fire action potentials so you put an electrode in the brain what do you hear? You yourself have said how exciting it is to hear the popping sound of real neurons when you stick electrodes in the brain why would you study glia they're boring you know they're just there for support fung sheds right. Yes but can you hear the silence that's the glia oh student of mine that's what you hear listen in between the spikes yeah. Yeah it could be I have I don't know have you ever seen movies of calcium signals in glial networks? I have not no no I wonder is there a way I can share a link with you of one of those movies. Sure. So what I'm seeing light up is all or mostly glial? Yeah and you can tell by their morphology they have this very flat looked at them you don't see a lot of of fine neurites in there and I think in that culture most of the neurons had died off so there was almost only glial cells in that culture. So what does this tell us? So there's a lot of that so I see a lot of flashing activity this is good for an audio podcast. And do you see it? One thing that I noticed is how differentiated it it's not just there's a wave crossing the whole dish here like you would expect in in something that just has a support function looks like it's processing information to me what do you think? Oh gosh I don't want yeah it looks like it it is but that's you know that's anyone's guess right because I so the anthropomorphize it anyway but it does look like there is a pattern across and among all of the glial cells and oh is it okay to link to this in the show notes it's not yeah your upper dream okay yeah I'll link to the show notes yeah so there's a lot of activity. Yeah so so watching those movies really open my eyes to the possibility that glial cell are playing a much bigger role in not only information processing in the brain but probably storage of information too they could they could be part of the memory. Well the one of the most interesting and important things that's different between glia neurons besides the action potentials is that they divide so in our culture dishes the only cells that we're dividing where the glial cells and and you know what does that say if they are storing memories are they do those get erased when they divide or is they are they somehow carried or are the memories stored somewhere in the perinuronal structure you know this sort of crap that forms around the cells and holds them all in place the cells secrete various proteins what not there's some people that are saying that's where the memories are stored in one of the places memories are stored. It's so interesting we're still so early we're talking about where memories are stored and you know we don't even know yet. No I mean we know some things obviously synapses are one place where memories are stored and but the problem is it's people are so focused on that I wish they would open their minds a little bit. So one of the ways that people can open their minds and and there's a push you know well I'll just jump to it so you were recently a part of a panel in a carbon copies workshop I guess and this particular workshop so carbon copies is an attempt and oh and by the way I'll be interviewing Randall Cohen and Kenneth Hayworth together. Fantastic. Yeah. carboncopies.org don't forget a dot org or people might be able to find it there. Yeah is it non-profit I guess it is yeah yeah okay so you're on a panel on about you know what what's the right level of abstraction to worry about when when performing a a whole brain emulation so that's kind of a mouthful but and you talked a little bit about glial cells and you know the the putting in a potential of memory and I'll link to that as well because that's a really interesting discussion and there's a few other presenters and and Ken Hayworth and Randall are you know kind of running the show as well and participating how did you come to be on that panel first of all and and then I just kind of want your thoughts on on the whole on the whole whole brain emulation game. Well Randall Cohen and I have been friends for a long long time he used to work in Garamokker's group in Netherlands studying very similar things to what what I was studying as opposed tock and Jerry Pine's lab at the time so so are knowing about each other dates back to the 90s and we've met at numerous conferences and and had talks about all sorts of interesting things and he is very unusual in the sense that he is a futurist who is not a crank I mean that comes across I hate to say it but most of the people who call themselves futurists are kind of a bit on the fringe of of reality and not most of them are not even scientists which is okay you know if if non-scientists want to get into this stuff that's great as long as they don't spread nonsense and things that are not true that's fine with me but Randall Kerne is a is a real neuroscientist he's done real electrophysiology is actually very good at it and in vitro and in vivo I believe and he he has decided that this whole futurism thing is is where he's going to go and created this organization he did a bunch of other stuff too before that that was related to this and so anyway I guess the key thing there is that carboncopies.org is is interested in saying look if we ever wants to get an AI this anywhere near as powerful as a human brain what do we have to do they're just asking the question and there are many many aspects to that question and I think one of my main points in that workshop that I was part of was to keep reminding them to try to refine your question you know if you're too vague about what level of representation is important then you're going to be just like the the folks in hitchhiker's guide to the galaxy who accidentally asked you know the greatest computer of all time what was the answer to life the universe and everything and it just came out with 42 wasn't a very useful answer because they didn't really specify the question very well yeah yeah you did keep coming back to that at three or four times and and then can also have the brain preservation foundation which you know his point just thinking about the glial cells right his point is that we already have pretty good technology that could fix tissue in such a way that when you die there's a very very very slim chance that if you were fixed using these techniques that you'd be able to just be brought back once we figured out how to reverse the process and and that that's you know so that's sort of his push on this whole thing and that that comes to that like where memories are stored and how they're stored and if glial cells are important then you got to get them fixed in the you know the same way and so it's interesting stuff so but so you're you're very pro well what's your what's your take on the whole brain emulation the outlook right now and then maybe projecting because you know Randall uses a slide I think where he projects out every few decades every few decades up until 20 oh I don't know 2170s or something like that and tries to be realistic about what can be achieved with the technology and this is where the futurism and not being a crank and and being so it's pretty humble about what might be able to you know be achieved comes in yeah well I think it's it's a it's a huge field it does it's there's not many that people that are actually seriously talking about it or interested in yet but it's it has so many repercussions that it's huge it's kind of like asking what's your take on farming you know what do you mean are you talking about farming of animals of animals are we talking about right so so it's so huge it's that really is that big and I kept on bringing this up saying look you know what do you guys want to do do you what are you just out here to make a good AI that we can use as helpers are you here to revive us after we're dead you know there's a lot of different reasons why you would want to emulate brains or parts of brains I would say that my lab was already doing that we were taking little pieces of brain tissue putting an addition trying to get it to remember things to guide behavior to to do various things that normally is the purview of just brains even though this is a very simplified system and I would even say that the artificial neural network skies who are doing deep learning are doing brain emulation of some sort so so so all of this stuff I put in the brain emulation category and the the real long term goal here is getting something that he has human level capability if we can emulate something to that level that will be amazing first of all and it will be a long time in the future second of all because number one as you said there's so many things we we were just at the beginning of understanding and number two it's just immensely complicated even if you understand it it doesn't mean that you can create it or or even simulate it to enough precision to get it to do the right things now the lot of the debate that we had during that workshop was do you need to simulate it you know maybe you can just sweep most of that detail and that complexity under the carpet and not worry too much about it and there's I think there's some pretty good arguments that that's the case but again even in that case you reminded them well it depends on what you want I mean you kept coming back to this point and dependent depends on what you're asking sorry then yeah so for example our thousand neuron simulation we wanted to study what was the effect of of dish wide bursts of action potentials on learning and storing information patterns and recall and this model network produced the very same bursting patterns that are culturedishes produced you know after Zena's tuned the parameters a little bit not very much it produced very good dynamics that was true to what the living neurons were producing and more importantly it allowed us to design experiments that we could then go and do on the real neurons you know it allowed us to predict things it wasn't just an explanatory thing was a prediction tool that we used so our goal was to make a prediction tool that would allow us to run experiments in in silico you could say you know in our computer model it was actually on Zena's gaming laptop we could run those models much quicker and more often and more and more experiments than he could do by growing neurons and he just said look let's just simulate a bunch these until we get it to work and then we'll we'll start doing it on real neurons and then him and and Bachum did that and it worked we were able to train the neurons well one of the things that you so carbon copies by the way hang on let me take a step back I forgot to mention I was going to mention this to you before we started recording but what the heck it'll go into the recording I still get emails about your first episode and one of my favorite you know because people are you know really impressed by the work that you've done well I still have this email in my inbox marked on red for various reasons but the subject line is brains in dishes exclamation point exclamation point about and they were they were excited about your episodes so just a way people are still listening to those good yeah well we were ahead of our time that the whole in vitro networks as a model system was wasn't and still isn't really quite appreciated as in terms of how useful it was and the or the success of organoids lately is proof of that you know that the people glombed onto that and said wow this is really cool and I I would say go look at our papers you know the potter lab our website has all our papers for downloading and if you if you look at those you'll see there are a lot of interesting and useful stuff that my group did that you know the papers are well-sighted they're still being cited however they each each one of those papers could have spawned a subfield of here's what you can do with cultured neural networks you know whether it's gleele computation or grant you know the interesting dynamical processes that we observed or repeating patterns we observed or learning mechanisms we enter creating art creating art yeah there's a whole other thing to do with art science collaborations yeah yeah so so I think yeah I I really hesitate to say that we weren't to appreciate as much as we should have been because that's not true we were you know as I say the papers are cited however I expected that by this time a lot more labs would have picked this up and said oh yeah brains and dishes we should do that yeah exclamation points exclamation points if you want to call them organoids fine that's fine you could call them whatever the heck you want you know we we just I think the key thing is that it's a much simpler system than an intact brain and allows you most the most important aspect of it allows you to actually observe it while it's thinking and learning which is really hard to do in any animal that's moving around yeah I guess in an organoid you could do it to some extent these days and in a 3d volumetric shaped thing with with the calcium imaging now on the microscopy I don't know with anybody yeah yeah I think so but this I mean this brings me to my next question in a previous episode here's what you said about academia versus industry so I'll play that and then maybe you can expand on it a little bit so a realization that hit me in the last five years is that the academic research model is just too slow I have seen fantastic rapid advances by neural link and kernel open AI and the Allen institutes especially that have convinced me that we will get to understanding and emulating the brain much faster when billionaires fund such research either for commercial or philanthropic reasons rather than individual academics having to apply for and wind government grants to get a tiny incremental step accomplished with a small team of researchers we should take the neuroscience efforts of billionaires more seriously I don't think that industry is that great at trying to at understanding artificial intelligence or or natural intelligence I think they're very good at getting at accomplishing big goals and usually those goals have to have some kind of return on investment at physical payoff of some sort to be in industry it's not always true like for example the Allen Institute I don't know if you call that industry but we have a multibillionaire who donate a visionary Paul Allen who donated a lot of money to make these amazing discoveries that the Allen Institute is still making in artificial intelligence cell science immunology and brains all these different institutes that he started that kind of stuff you know it's it just moves everything along much faster than you see in academia academia I haven't you know I although I closed my lab up in 2015 and there's even a section my book is about how why or how I left academia but I haven't really left academia I I'm still an adjunct professor at Georgia Tech I still do consulting in neuroscience and would collaborate with my former colleagues so I don't have anything against academia per se and I think that their model is actually very good at understanding things and much more keen on getting at the understanding side of it when you're in industry you know as I learned in what my one summer internship when I was in college and I worked in the industry whenever I asked questions about understand trying to understand things they always said to me why do you care you know that's not going to make us any money why you asking this question this is a waste of time let's get back to work we have a product to build here so so what industry is good at is is moving a product forward or some great accomplishment you know like getting SpaceX and throwing a zillion satellites up there so that rural areas can have the internet all over the world you know that's that's a project that could never have happened in academia yeah sure so many billions of dollars to make it happen and Neuralink is another one you know that Elon Musk needed he needed a visionary like him to to really push neural interfaces for to where they could be useful so I I know almost all of the players in the neural interfacing world I I worked with them I I collaborated with them I saw them in conferences we all went to the same conferences so all of these guys are great and I admire and respect them but I have to say that the the the progress that they made was so agonizingly slow that it always disappointed me you know it's repeatedly disappointed whenever I heard somebody you know like Andy Schwartz saying here we put electrodes into a monkey we've got it to to do so and so grab a marshmallow and bring it to its mouth for instance yeah he might have made great progress in understanding something about population coding but he didn't really make any progress on understanding intelligence I don't think you know and none of those guys have is that there's a few women involved in that also Karen Moxon's one you know they they've done some they've done some great engineering those researchers who were doing a neural interface they've they built probes silicon probes that have become successful help labs like Yuri Bajaki with their understanding of the brain but making a product that's useful to people you know in helping large numbers of people with some medical problem be better or helping us all be more intelligent or something like that just hasn't happened nobody's been no one's had the wheelbase to dream that big even let alone do it until Elon Musk comes along and says let's just do this you know yeah with his vision and money yeah and he also has a luxury of just hiring and firing hundreds if not thousands of people at will you know he can snap his fingers and if they're not doing the job they're gone you know and if they are doing the job you hire twice as many of them throughout my entire academic career there is always every week out here basic research needs more funding labs need more funding we need to get the NIH more to fund us more and I had in the back of my head I thought that all sounds sounds right but then I just knew so many yeah I'm not you know even excluding myself so many people who could have been doing more with the funding that they had or refining their questions like you were just talking about asking better questions and making making sure they were they were setting up their experiments right I'll say hour experiments right you know and and I thought well maybe less funding is the answer but that you can't say that out loud and I can certainly I know but you will admit that I can admit it now that I'm that I'm out of academia quote unquote getting funding the biggest problem with the funding situation is that we spent so much of our time trying to get funding once we got funding it was usually quite a bit of funding you know usually it was a million or two million bucks per grant from the NIH the NSF not so much but it was still a good amount so the problem was not I don't think it was really the funding the problem was the kinds of projects that do get funded usually weren't that big any work that collaborative and there's very few labs that on their own could make a great advance in in these big picture questions you know but that's the way academia works you chip away little by little lab by lab at a big picture question and eventually it does all get answered and and and at some point a few of those academics have spin-off companies and they might hit it big you know they might actually make a product that sells it could also be the case that they inspire by what they did chipping away you know what what what Wulpa and Dick Norman did you know might have inspired Elon Musk and said yeah I want to do more of this neuronal facing thing you know even if even if Norman wasn't able to do some big grand scale thing himself he inspired a lot of people so so so I think that I don't think it's a case that we needed more money in academia I would say if anything what we needed was projects in which the funding agency requires it to be a collaboration between people that have the right skills set to get a big job we had a few of those grants I mentioned the 3d culture grant the BRP the bioengineering research partnership that we got was one of those it involves six different PIs I believe and it was you know probably on the order of several million dollars a year getting split amongst those six labs so those kinds of projects need to be fun another ones are the ERCs coming from the NSF the engineering resource centers they're big funding and those accomplish amazing things when you see what they accomplish you say wow that's something else I was part of one of those this I don't know if it's ERC but it was NSF funded Center for Behavioral Neuroscience which involved basically anyone in all of the Atlanta area no matter which university they were at Emory Dore Ditech Georgia State the historically black colleges in Atlanta all of those whoever did any kind of behavioral neuroscience was part of the CBN Center for Behavioral Neuroscience and so it was a big operation funded by the NSF and it accomplished so many amazing things and we got together you know even in my own lab so many my own lab benefited so much from the interactions we got with all these other behavioral neuroscientists from you know all the way from psychology down to looking at sea slugs and whatnot so it's maybe the part of the answer you know it's happening more and more is creating these larger consortiums of labs right there's I think international brain laboratory where there's a bunch of different labs that are willingly you know collecting into networks of labs that then share the resources and test you know equivalent hypotheses and things like that to really yeah nail down answers yeah more of that if there's any funders whether they're private foundations or government agencies listening to this put more money in those kind of big projects and and work really hard to make sure that whoever's running the show is responsible and and has a track record that they're going to actually organize it so the person running the CBN when I joined up was Tom Insel who subsequently became the head of NIMH and and he is just a super sharp guy who ran nothing really well and then subsequently stewards or Stuart Stewart Zola ran the show at the CBN and both of those guys really did a good job of making sure that everybody communicated we haven't we had enough get-togethers and whether they be social or or scientific to make sure that we really did interact and learn a lot from each other great okay well now it's you know only 50 minutes in but Steve let's talk about at book you had a productive research career what's something that we have not talked about however is your new book how to motivate your students to love learning and this is a collection of everything that you've learned through your experience your your massive experience as we'll come to know as we talk about it your massive teaching experience and and testing things out you've collected all of that along with a bunch of anecdotes a lot of you know a lot of feedback from your students good and bad which was I thought one of the real strength of the book is you put some some criticisms of some of the things that you that you could improve in your teaching and which is interesting because this you know the whole book is sort of an ode to self-improvement and how to continue to improve to teach yeah I like that that's a good by-line and I'll probably quote you on an ode to self-improvement there you go okay yeah I remember reading you know difficult papers when you're kind of starting out in a new field right and you have to go to the primary literature and it sometimes is almost impossible to understand anything that you're reading for instance even you know in research papers because it's so specialized in jargony and I used to think that the blame was all on me for just being ignorant and not being able to understand what was being communicated and now having written papers and I don't know you know how I don't know how other people you know experience my own writing and of course it's always with you know collaborators but now I think most of the blame is on the writer and reading the book I reading your book I I really realized that a lot of the blame in my education is actually just poor teaching I have my large fair share of that blame as well in my in my own motivating my own self-motivation and intrinsic motivation and how that waxed and waned you know throughout the my academic career so the book really kind of centers on an approach that you found really motivates students to learn and that is by you would have created these real world assignments and what's called problem-based learning and that's kind of the core of the book you also talk a lot about well and we'll kind of run through this stuff but the neuroscience underlying the learning and how to kind of a step by step to motivate students you give like detailed syllabus syllabi that's plural yeah syllabi for all of the things that you sort of honed over the years so I you know I wanted to get I want to get into a lot of these topics and then like I said it's half autobiography as well and and you you know in the kind of the beginning of the book you talk about how you were brought up and your experiences and how that shaped you're thinking about how to teach and you're and what's useful for learning in general I guess I'll just start by asking how you're upbringing influenced your your current outlook or at least the beginnings of starting to test how to teach and and what works and what doesn't well which aspects of my upbringing do you mean like my family upbringing or my experience in school or which which aspects are you asking so it's interesting I mean I have a lot of questions about this you talk a lot about your family and how your mother was really encouraging with a lot of different sorts of art projects for instance and and your dad was a jet propulsion laboratory researcher and he was always explaining to you how gadgets worked I think I don't know of microscopes was the is the example or a camera it's so you know you give examples of this throughout the book and you talk about how you knew you wanted to be a scientist by the time your age five for instance yeah and I think that that is not common right I think most scientists when that happens someone is willing to say that I knew it when I was five right well what I could tell you exactly what the pivotal moment in my upbringing was there which is my my fifth birthday I believe it was when I got my little set of screwdriver's and proceeded to take apart all my toys and figure out how they work so so I became a little engineer at that point and my parents never complained about anything that I did you know I could get away with anything basically yeah and so taking apart my toys was just part of the deal taking part your toys building hang glider racks on the top of your car eventually just engineering everything that you did I mean it just seems like you had this so there are external factors right your parents and the way that they helped you know encourage that sort of thing in you but but what struck me is there always seems to have been an intrinsic motivation and I'm wondering if that is the case I mean you seem to be a naturally intrinsically motivated individual and I'm wondering if that is true that if you have this natural intrinsic motivation and how much that actually has to do with what you eventually ended up trying to instill in your students for instance yeah that's definitely true so so some of my teaching practices came from introspecting where do I get my motivation from I am definitely intrinsically motivated my my parents were not very good at motivating me in terms of you know saying you must do this or or you know like for example I did take up the flute in fourth grade I think and what was that on your own without anyone suggesting it to you I believe it was a teacher probably said we're gonna start music classes and if any of you want to play a certain musical instrument you have to talk to your parents and get them to fork over the money to rent whatever instrument it is and I remember you know my family was pretty poor and we had to go and rent a flute which is made of silver I mean it just looked like it was so expensive and that was probably a big decision between the two of them that I was not part of you know will we even pay for Steve to to rent a flute because he's never expressed an interest in playing flute before why should he why should he do that now they did it they got me the flute I practiced up until the point where we had to learn how to read music off paper and that's kind of where I sort of fell behind and lost interest and that's an example so I was intrinsically motivated up to a point but most people who are learning a new instrument require their parents to say go and practice your flute now or play the piano or whatever it is my parents never did that so intrinsic motivation apparently wasn't quite enough to keep me going and I still haven't learned how to play the flute it's gonna happen someday but but I don't have quite enough motor intrinsic motivation yet now I think I do have more intrinsic motivation or did at least as a kid in doing all sorts of projects on my own and so I did a lot of projects and got excited by them and watching and reminiscing about that is part of what shaped my teaching my my whole pedagogy approach that projects I saw for me anyway were always the thing that really got me excited you know when it was building a model plane soldering together synthesizer whatever was if it was a big project mostly I was teaching myself but occasionally I had a mentor like my mom or my dad helping me out or a friend of mine or books in the library you know it goes to the library and the key thing there is that you have to have some kind of scaffolding yeah in school you have teachers for that purpose but if you're doing projects on your own at home you kind of need someone to point the way for you at least and sometimes I had that and other times I didn't and I just dropped it whatever it was I just didn't have enough scaffolding I mean what do you think about people who are obviously bright but who don't have that and I'm thinking about you know in your younger years or in people's younger years who don't have that intrinsic motivation that seemed so prevalent in your brain you know or that their interests are so divergent that they they can't really hold focus on to finish a single project for instance yeah so the lack of focus is a growing epidemic I would say worse than COVID-19 I don't think there is a single kid out there who doesn't have a lot of intrinsic motivation I mean kids are just full of energy I keep on whenever I'm around children which I love to be I teach in makerspaces and they just energize me because they're so full of energy and they all want to just do so many things so the problem is much more not where do you get get the energy kids naturally have that and the problem is focusing it staying you know on one project whether it's learning fluid or whatever and parents can help a lot there teachers wherever wherever the kids can get it nowadays YouTube is a great source of information to help focus and serve as kind of like a mentor you know it's kind of a one-way mentor it's not very good at the two-way communication but it's very useful for for getting on stuck if you're if you're trying to do a project and you're a kid with a lot of intrinsic motivation but you're feeling like you're frustrated there are a lot more resources now than there ever were when I was a kid if I if I don't know how to search the solder op-amp you know say it successfully back then it was okay I get on my bike bike five miles to library try to find a book on op-amps then try to figure out what does the language mean get out of dictionary and say okay this is written at such a high level I can't even understand it whereas nowadays it's like here we're going to do op-abs today for people who don't know about op-amps this is what they are you know yeah yeah so so the world has really improved in that regard now the the thing that hasn't improved it's gotten much worse is the focusing thing there's so many things pulling at kids nowadays or people of all ages who want to learn something that their attention is divided and they can't really make much progress on any one project or any one effort in or it's the cam but it's just very difficult to stay focused and where do you get that focus from that's a that's a really tough question you know the key key thing is I suppose trying not to give in to other factors that are influencing you whether it's advertising Netflix or whatever that's drawing your attention and and defocusing you gaming is another one I can speak to you from a lot of personal experience when I was young that's right you hold the record in oh what was that you talking about the track what is it a rubber track rubber track yeah where you spent a summer basically breaking records hours and hours playing this game over and over right which I think a lot of people can relate to that yeah and it was it was you know mostly a waste of time it was good for socially bonding me with my friends who I played games with and nowadays it's even much more social now that they have online gaming where everybody puts their headphones on and they're talking to people around the world that they're working on a you know warcraft team or whatever yeah so it so it has social benefits but other than that it's kind of a waste of time in my I feel like it's a pretty limited benefit yeah yeah and it has a lot of potential negative consequences in terms of making them get used to violence and bad things like that right one of the things that I continually was struck with reading the book is so it's about ostensibly well it is about how to motivate your students but one could also use this as a self motivation how to develop one's own self intrinsic motivation like what do I need to do how do I need to structure my own curriculum my own scaffolding to best optimize my completion rate on projects on you know how to move forward how to understand things and and you know do you think that the principles espoused in the book that and we're going to go through a few of them here do you think that they're just as you know applicable for intrinsic self motivation you mean outside of a school context yeah self learning yeah yeah because I mean a lot of self motivation is important in school as well well we could go but both but yeah in school you have presumably if you have a teacher like you which are rare then you have that right scaffolding but if you're you know someone like me or you know even the lifelong learners right that want to create their own learning environment it seems like these are just as applicable to that sort of setup yeah I think a lot of the more a lot of the things I talk about in the book are definitely relevant to to self learning because my teaching style was mostly developed by me doing self learning as you will read in the autobiographical section my education my schooling was pretty crappy you know and I could count the good teachers I had on one hand and I think I still have a finger that's not being used yet so I mean it was really bad and there are very few cases I point to and I pretty much put them all in the book of where I had a good teacher who actually taught me something useful that I remember to this day the rest of it was pretty much junk and so most of the learning that I remember and then I found useful as a grown up as an adult were things I taught myself or I learned you know with my friends outside of school so so I think the key there is is mentoring that that you know I we touched on this a little bit before but the great thing about school and project based learning in school is that you have a good scaffolding you have a teacher who presumably knows enough about whatever it is that the kids are going to do projects on that they can help guide those projects you know it doesn't I hate scripted projects as you read in the book but but but they should definitely be developed in collaboration with the students they should not be handed to the students and nor should they students be left on their own to create their own projects without any guidance both of those are kind of disaster situations so so you need a collaboration between the teachers and the students and other mentors that they might include you know and that goes for outside of school as well so so my best advice to anyone who wants to do self learning and to get more motivated or and or focused for self learning and whatever age is fine mentors you know so for example I during the COVID-19 I've taken up an old hobby mine RC plane flying which has really gotten much better since I used to do this back in grad school thanks to the fact that there are electric motors now and lipo batteries and FPV cameras and all that's high tech stuff so I'm learning all of those things and I have several mentors who are YouTubers that post tons of videos on this stuff and and whenever I watch those videos I learn something and occasionally I have posted a comment and they're asked a question and get fantastic feedback from them so so I really do think they are my mentors now these these YouTubers and that's fantastic the other thing is your parents if you if you for some reason aren't getting any mentoring from them go to your uncles go to your friends parents or whatever source of potential mentors you can find and get some mentoring and they will help you define your projects they will help you focus on and stay focused you know you can you can do this as a as a group or as a pair of of people that both need to learn this new thing whatever it may be so find mentors that will help you with the scaffolding because outside of school that scaffolding is is is hard to come by you really have to make sure it's there you can try to do projects without scaffolding and you might find that you you're building a tower without a scaffold which is a bit dangerous and you might find that you built it in the wrong place and you in fact built the wrong kind of tower how's it going somebody who is your mentor would point out to you hey you should build it over there that would be a much better place to build your tower or you should be more careful when you do so and so because this tower is going to fall over you know so mentorship that's really really important you mentioned that there were just you know maybe a few half a handful of mentors or teachers when you're growing up that you can remember that made a positive impact or that were good basically teachers what I'm going to ask you to tell the story of your first real world assignment so let's talk real world assignments from mr. Barnes that this happened to me multiple times reading your book where it taught me about my own history and I could reflect for instance there's there was a teacher named Miss Pitman in high school and one of the assignments she we had multiple assignments like these it was like the hardest assignment we had to go to a retirement home she had a go to a retirement home spend about an hour with we each had an individual that we spend an hour with and the goal was to learn their story and then after about an hour uh visiting with them uh then we'd circle back around and then we would everyone gathered in the room then and then we would tell their story as if we were them and I had I mean I remember I had a world war two veteran he had a you know a concentration camp tattoo and he like got through the war by boxing and that's how he got respected by his captors and this you know and I had to and it was so nerve-racking but so memorable and such a valuable experience wow that's cool so she had all sorts of what are called real-world assignments which I didn't know that there's a name for it what age were you then that was early high school yeah or junior high so already pretty old I even went first I always tend to go first because I just want to get it over with because the nerves but you had that really early on and I don't have examples you know from really early on but what was your what is a real-world assignment and what did Mr. Barnes assign you remember well he did a number of different real-world assignments he was he was teach this is a John Mirror High School in Pasadena as in the John Mirror in the naturalist yeah it's named after the naturalist John Mirror and coincidentally I went to John Mirror College at UC San Diego I don't know so I am I am an nature lover so it was he was destined to be anyway Bob Barnes was a fantastic teacher and the main reason he was was because he he realized that an urban studies class could be boring or it could actually be useful and he he what like for example one of the assignments was for us to learn all about how markets that sell groceries price their goods and so we went into three different sizes of shops and had a big list of various things that we might buy that we had to find the prices for and at the end of that I was fantastic at knowing what we should get when everyone went shopping with the family I could say oh no you should get this bigger package because it's a little bit cheaper and and don't fall for that that's just a coupon deal it's not actually gonna save us anything you know so I was I was much more knowledgeable and a much better shopper after that and I ended up working in high school as a as a box boy in the supermarket so so that actually came in really handy just in terms of working in the supermarket as well he didn't know that I was gonna do that and I don't think it influenced my decision to work in the supermarket it just just happened to be the job that was available at the time but anyway there were also a lot of opportunities for real world learning through the ski club that he was the advisor of so I I took a role of organizing several ski trips from my my fellow high school students and he he really did a good job of shepherding us giving us the scaffolding we needed to do this organizing but not getting in our way and not being impressive with these rules or anything you know he's he was just a master at that knowing knowing just how hands on to be and say that pretty much went for for all of his little real world assignments and another one was going to a house that was having an open house for sale and hopefully finding the realtor during a quiet moment and saying is it okay even though I'm a high school student who obviously doesn't have the money to buy this house is it okay if I pretend I'm gonna buy it can I ask you questions as if I'm gonna buy it and we interviewed the realtor and and drew up a floor plan of the house and and the realtor was happy to to help yeah and we we learned about buying houses you know which is something that you need to know if you when you grow up or you might need to know unlikely and it's much better learning than if he just had given us a handout saying here are the things you need to know when you buy a house we would have thrown it away and forgot about it by the time we were actually getting a buy a house yeah I mean these are often I think examples like this are often feel painful at the time and you know can be fun but are especially in retrospect the most rewarding things the most valuable things and I don't know if your students I don't know if they felt you know there are some because you you quote your students one of the things that you do constantly did was you would put little survey questions at the end of quizzes and tests and things and so you would get direct feedback from the students and so there I think there are you know handful in there about you know your course is being demanding but really worth it and you know we'll talk more about that as we move forward maybe what we should do is just step through a few of the ways that you know students are motivated that you list in the in the book so you have you know a bunch of sections we don't have to go through them all but it might be worth starting with you know the Yerks Dodson curve which is this well I'll just let you explain what the Yerks Dodson curve is and how it relates to keeping students engaged okay it's pronounced Yerks and rhymes with turkeys that's the way to remember in an audiobook version yeah so Yerks Dodson curve is something that psychologists know a lot about I know I know only a little bit about it but the key thing is that it's a graph of performance versus the level of excitement and it forms what they call an inverted U shape so it's just a hill um that that drops off on both ends okay it's not a bell curve it's not something that has long tails it's something that drops off because when you are very unexcited that means you're at least your performance is really poor when you're asleep or you're dead you know there's there's an obvious end to the curve there on the other end you're overexcited and you are so hyperactive you're manic you can't even think straight you're a capital writer yeah you might be a writer exactly yeah you might just do some foolish things there so you're not you're not going to your performance at getting something accomplished especially in a school context is really poor on the excited end or on the not excited end so somewhere at the middle is the optimum level of excitement that you want to be at to learn and this is something the teachers need to have in the back of their mind all the time when they're running their classes constantly they need to be thinking about this curve and saying okay how excited are my students do I need to get them riled up do I need to get their enthusiasm going or are they too excited are they not focused and are they all just chatting and having great time or looking at their phones or whatever do I need to call them down you know I watched my sister Sandra do her class a few times where she would actually have them do mindfulness meditation in the middle of class you know they can okay you just come back from recess they're all excited they're all bouncing up the walls okay let's just calm down and relax and look at our little they made little bottles with glitter and then that they could look at and focus on and while they relaxed and had a mindful moment so so she was and still is very good at at modulating this excitement level in her students and I think the good teachers have to keep that in mind all the time yeah I wanted to bring that up first because it's sort of the center piece of because and like you just said you always have to keep that in mind of a lot of the other bays that you list to keep you know students motivated is within all of these other things that and we'll talk about a few you have to keep them at that right level of engagement I don't you maybe you know would you like to just say a few words about you know either either of the topics that of your choosing I assume you don't want to step through each one yeah well I think the so so getting students I I shouldn't even say it's this book is just for educating kids because you know I did my teaching of adults right in the college at the university level I sometimes would refer to them as kids because they're a lot younger than me but they weren't kids they were young adults getting your students excited is really important okay we covered that pretty much I think that's kind of obvious most people know that but they don't really think about it at every moment of their teaching you know and they might think about how dangerous it is to get them too excited it might just say yeah the better excited more excited they are the better no that's not true the thing that I really want to emphasize probably of that list of various things I think there's six different things I have here in the book is to do with social motivations so I call it motivation from interaction and I honestly think this is the strongest motivator that that almost anybody has you know there are a few of us like me who tend to be loners who are less motivated by social interactions but we still are and peer pressure is a huge motivator for for kids especially adolescents but but all kids in fact look at what their peers are doing and they very much care what their peers think about them and they will be motivated by that and so as a teacher you can just ignore that and say oh that's stuff for their playground you know that's that's what they do on recess but no what you should do is take advantage of that and one way to do that is with teams you know how the students work in teams and tell the teams you guys are a team you have to work as a cohesive unit and if there's anybody who's not pulling their load you need to let them know that and if there's anybody who's doing a great job you need to let them know that too because that's all part of the whole peer pressure thing if you want to get maximum motivation from social interactions both the positive and the negative need to be brought up in class regularly in terms of good social interactions and bad social interactions and you will find you can leverage those things so so it won't be so much work for you to get the students excited and motivated you can let the students themselves do a lot of that work by their social interactions I mean it seems like that's that could be a fine line because there are some people who are shine more I suppose or are more much more comfortable let's say working in groups and and then there's this dynamic of a natural leader will arise or a know-it-all and so there are a lot of different layers and dynamics going on in those social groups so you have to pay attention to that as well I suppose yeah yeah you do you have to pay attention to it so I was teaching one of the courses I taught is is problem-based learning for first years in edward detect in the biomedical engineering department and they I would sit in a room with eight students for an hour and a half twice a week and during an hour and a half you can go through a lot of material and get really gets to know all eight of them and they get to know you after well too and your job is not to teach but to facilitate the group interaction and to provide a little bit of scaffolding but mostly in terms of the meta skills not in that not in terms of the problem they're trying to solve they have to figure that out themselves but but in terms of how they go about solving it and group interactions is one of the big things that you can scaffold them on so for example if I notice that there's somebody who is a really good leader type person you know and and maybe she's really charismatic and everybody tends to believe everything she says I might right after she says something and everybody's not in the head going yeah yeah yeah that's that's great I'm so glad she knows that I would say to somebody else in the room do you think that's true how do you know that's true what she just said there you know so just a little thing like that she she's probably got the confidence level that that won't devastate her if I'm doubting her and I after well they'll all learn that me one of my big lessons I'm teaching constantly is to be skeptical of every little thing in biomedical engineering you got to be very skeptical and another one is if there's a quiet student to take that person who's more comfortable with social interactions and being a leader and saying hey do you think next time we meet you could bring that quiet person out you know use all that energy you have to to get them to contribute more you know you you are contributing little more than you should you're taking more of the of the time that the class has available for discussion to to give your own ideas and I think some of the people aren't getting heard so maybe you can after you've said your ideas go to the quietest person and say what do you think about that and bring them out and and they're usually happy to do that and and the quiet person is usually happy to be included there's like oh yeah the leader person is actually cares what I have to say maybe I should say something here um so so that's uh just an example of the you're right it's very complicated dynamics that go on in classes especially in these problems that we're trying to solve or big projects um and teachers have to be kind of fine tuned there I wouldn't say that I'm very good at it I became much better at it after doing a lot of these teachings but there are other people who are much more naturally gifted in this regard and tuning into what are the social dynamics of their students I was going to ask about this later but I'm going to bring it up now because when you're going and asking that that person to contribute in a you know in a in a group way in a various way to bring bring bring the quiet person out you're going to them uh knowing their name and a lot about them already and calling them by name because on what you I don't know if you when you started doing this but you described the process and and this just goes to the the demands that it takes that it takes to be a teacher like you have been at first day of class you would have everyone write down their name you would have everyone write down their name on an index card and some piece of information I I don't have it in front of me but then you would have them read that into a camera record all of the names and sometimes this is up to 300 or so all right uh about a hundred was the biggest class that I taught then you'd go home and memorize them all good god yeah well uh that I think that that doesn't uh necessarily imply that I some kind of a superhero I mentioned in the book that I'm not I'm not very good at remembering names or phases and that um I put the work into it because I knew something about how the brain works and how memory works it works by association and so those index cards that they wrote I had them write something of interest to them and a question like why did you take this class right in the first day of class they must have had a reason for taking it if they did maybe they should be dropping the class moving on to the next one but anyway I so to learn people's names remember it's not just their your it's not just names you're learning it's you're learning faces and names and you'll be able to remember those faces and names much better if there are quite a few other things you can also associate with those names and faces so the more things you can associate the better this is something that I knew just from being an neuroscientist probably a lot of teachers already knew this um and you know pedagogical tools might have emphasized this or they might not you know to learn the times tables we never learned it by association we learned it by you know reciting the times tables over and over again um so there are other ways to learn but the best way to learn these kinds of things like names and faces that are kind of arbitrary is by associating there with lots of little details so the sound of the person's voice on my camera recording the way their face looks the way they move um the the level of enthusiasm they may or may not have when they're talking into a camera on the first day in class um and some little detail about why they took class or what they're interested in all that stuff gets connected in my brain and helps me put a name to that face whenever I see them again and what I noticed is that that association would fade pretty quickly and I had to keep reinforcing it pretty much every single class before class I would I would look at this printout of all the faces and I would test myself by writing as quick as I could the names under each person's face um because when you're answering questions in class you have to be quick you you you you don't have more than a second or so before if someone raises their hand for you to call on them and say their name so I would I would do a speed reinforcement uh by by trying to remember their names uh from pictures that I had made from the video and it took a lot of work uh took took replaying that video I would say 50 times the day after the first day of class and subsequently I didn't have to look at the video again I I pretty much only had to look at their uh index cards once in a while and remind myself of some of the things on the index cards so so the key lessons there are uh make associations put a lot of work into it for only one day that's not that much work you know I think of almost every school teacher will spend an entire evening or or day preparing one lesson plan it's not at all unusual for a teacher to put an entire day of work into something that's only going to take an hour of their time later to uh to benefit the students from so if it's going to benefit all year long or all semester long like knowing their names it's well worth putting a day of work into it and then reinforcing it for five minutes before each class it's not it's not that big of an ordeal really well I'll just mention one more of the six pieces of advice that you give to keep students motivated and and people can read the book for the rest but as that is by control or autonomy sort of and and this will segue into the kinds of projects that you that you chose for the the students as teaching as and learning examples um and I chose this one because so so there's so you want you give as much control as possible to the students in deciding the topic of their project or you know the the type of well the topic of their project for instance and and this is one of those areas where you actually did get some pushback that you were some some students felt like you're giving too much control and it's just interesting because there's such a variety of different types of learners and where people are in their heads and in their own intrinsic motivations that I that could be pretty intimidating to someone some people just want to be told what to do right but but you found that this is a way to keep them at that right level at the Yorky's Dodson curve see I got the name right there uh and you know because it always kind of goes back to that because too much control too much autonomy and they might be not motivated enough and you know so there's this always this balancing act yeah you have to you definitely have to um you always have to tune the amount of control but it's not something that you just decided at the beginning and say okay I'm gonna give my students this much control the key thing is you have to be adaptive during the projects or during whatever it is you're trying to accomplish with the students keep monitoring them and noticing if they feel lost because they were given too much control that was very common thing in my classes you know that at the beginning I just said hey you can design your own experiments and you get to build your own equipment you know they're like ah what do I do you know I don't know what to do so so you have to calm them down and say relax it's okay uh here are some ideas here we're gonna read the literature and get used to the kinds of things that you could do and um and you that's what I call scaffolding uh the most important kind of scaffolding that I did in my in especially in my neuroengineering lab class uh was was really guiding them in a in a very close um feedback loop where they were making decisions and I would judge you know were they on the right track or not and if they weren't I might guide them in a different way uh and if they were I would encourage them where I might just point them in the direction of where they would get more information to help guide themselves um but the key thing is you you definitely have to keep modulating that control level continuously throughout the whole process it's not just something that you make a blanket decision at the beginning and it's not also it's also not a one size fits all as you pointed out some students are more comfortable with being in control their own schooling than others especially if they've been through schooling that never gave them control you know like my schooling very seldom did I get to decide anything about my schooling um and then if you suddenly throw them into a class like mine where they suddenly have a lot of control uh it could be very scary and and and painful for them emotionally yeah um so you have to realize that and and and gradually let them in and and um I think one thing that I did that really helped in that regard was to uh have former students come to the class and say look this is what I did it was really fun trust me it's worth it you know once you get used to idea you have control it's really cool to have control or or to show them videos of what the previous students did you know so so what that means is you have to plan ahead for the next year and take some videos of what the students are accomplishing with the intention of showing them to the following class and if you don't have them then go online and find those kinds of videos of something that's similar to what you want to accomplish in your class and say look these students are doing this this is the kind of thing you guys could be doing you could have projects like this that are going to change the world and it's not too scary because look these guys are doing it and they're only fourth graders and you're you know tenth graders or whatever um so so yeah there's there there are a lot of different ways to ease them into this idea which might be very foreign which will be almost certainly if they're raised in American schools will probably be foreign to them yeah oh I didn't think about culturally across different education systems how how this sort of thing plays out yeah it might be useful just to step through one or two of the real world assignments that you used I don't know if you want to talk about the lab class more or you know the Wikipedia projects I do want to ask about Wikipedia also yeah I think Wikipedia is a good one because it's um it's applicable to any subject you know you it was I was um teaching an introductory neuroscience course however my real world project that the students had to do was to write Wikipedia articles on some neuroscience related topic that they got to choose so I gave them the control to choose the topic and the way they did that was to basically just mine their own thinking for which aspects of the brain are they most excited about why did they take this course anyway um if I had already given a lecture or two they might already have some ideas of which parts of the brain they care the most about and once they've done that they go they were to go on Wikipedia and try to find whether there's any article there about it and when I first started doing this was 2006 um there weren't you know Wikipedia had giant holes in it in the neuroscience world yeah still does but they're not nearly as big as they were then so pretty much anything the students wanted to write an article on for Wikipedia to do with neuroscience was available and needed to be written so and also the other thing was that it wasn't uh nearly as well respected then as it is now as a as a reference material and you know for good reason it was pretty crap back then um but my students have written over 300 articles for Wikipedia and improved it tremendously in the process at least in terms of the neuroscience that you can find there so so I I first just kind of the way this worked was uh I was I was going to teach a course that it turns out the for various um logistical reasons the enrollment turned out to be too low for the course to be taught you know they have a threshold this is not enough student sign up for it we we're canceling the course two of the students were so disappointed I said well why don't you guys do an independent study course with me we'll work together on some project and it was probably one of them that came open the idea and might even sure whose idea it was but anyway I said let's do a wiki pdf article writing project and they got to choose what the subject was and those two were basically the the alpha testers I won't even say beta testers the alpha testers of this idea of can students even write a wiki pdf article because that was an unknown thing back then um and they did it it it was a lot of work for for them both and they wrote fantastic article I think it was it was about nerve regeneration they ended up uh both contributing to a very large article and subsequently I decided to break up those kinds of articles in multiple articles but but anyway because they were so successful my co-teacher now McCarty and I said next time we teach introductory neuroscience we're gonna make that the project instead of a term paper we had a term paper before that and I just said uh the papers are so boring you know let them do something that's useful that actually benefits the world and it was a huge success even from the beginning it was awkward and everybody was kind of floundering in the dark including me I didn't really know the rules of of editing wiki pdf but I said look you guys there's tutorials up there let's just follow them and uh see what we can come up with and it worked and it got better and better every year we got more understanding of how the how the rules worked and wiki pdf the wiki media foundation developed more and more tools to help teachers do this and now they've got a whole side wiki education project uh that is specifically for this purpose of getting teachers to get involved in having their students do wiki pdf writing you know may not be creating whole articles from scratch anymore because most the articles are up there that's why I was wondering just a little bit of editing here and there could really benefit most articles and it's not just for english classes either you know it could be a subject matter in any subject you could imagine who should be up there on wiki pdf and probably already is somewhere and if it's not your students could be uh putting it up there I guess this uh I mean this goes back to one of the other motivating factors that you write about which is a sense of accomplishment and that is you know it is a real feeling of accomplishment and you communicated this to them as well that you know they they and they communicated it back to you that they really felt like they were contributing to society because they were providing uh material that was really read by people and really used and educated other people and that that is just uh uh well a feeling of accomplishment I suppose yeah I saw I saw a great contrast between the pdf class the problem based learning class that I was telling you about earlier where age students would solve biomedical engineering problem when I say solve I don't really mean they solved it you know they they they tried to tackle something like like what causes the variability in a heart rate monitor or or um how can we diagnose a cancer in fact one of the problems that that students were let loose on which was mostly a modeling problem is how do pandemics spread so all of the students who took that class and learned that problem are probably now saving the world I bet because they really got into modeling of pandemics and so anyway these problems at the time they took them weren't real world problems because the product of the class was a presentation maybe there'd be a few experts that were invited to watch the presentation but there really wasn't any way that it got that their efforts got back to the real world and benefited it it was kind of like the term paper where it gets put on the shelf at the end and I see that contrast between that and the ones in my neuroscience class where they were writing Wikipedia articles and doing other things that actually benefit the real world it really reinforced how much more motivation the students got when they saw that what they were doing was benefiting the real world not just a toy problem what I call a toy problem but an actual real problem where they're where they're doing something that other people who aren't in the school can look yeah I'm quite sure that yeah I mean they're you know the same goes for Amazon reviews which was another real world project based learning assignment that you implemented and I mean you know you talk about how you the students would keep notebooks on how to perform certain acts and that these notebooks would stay in class so that newer students coming in could see what the previous students did in these binders and and appreciate that they were learning from it and it was you know building this foundation of knowledge and getting passed along yeah and in fact even even it more in the real world a lot of the research that my students did in their lab class in their engineering lab class benefited my own research lab you know and became a binder in our research lab that we refer to all the time so it was not just benefiting future students but even benefiting real research that we would then publish you know so crazy and they're building equipment they built gadgets that at the end of the semester the class is over they don't need this gadget anymore guess where that ended up going so it ended up in our lab be used for something you know if you use the same trial and error sort of approach in your lab and managing a lab and and I know that that's one of the things that you miss is actually doing the lab work building the micro scopes and you came to be more of a manager role and that's one of the reasons why academia lost its machine but presumably you implemented a trial and error sort of learning process on how to run a lab and get your students productive and engaged I'm wondering when that book's coming out or if you were to have that one yet that's an interesting idea I won't say that I was a great manager I was reasonably good especially comparing to some other people who who I know either just completely ignored their labs you know they they were offered conferences all the time and and basically a sign postdocs to be in charge of everything or the other side which is kind of like my advisor when I was a grad student which has run every little detail of the lab I was somewhere in the middle there possibly closer to the lice affair let them run themselves side than the micro managing side it was definitely a lot of trial and error and the most important lesson that I learned eventually was the different students in my lab or postdocs required different management approaches and some of them required very little managing in fact some of them became experts at managing me you know they I could think of one particular grad student who was fantastic at managing me you know he knew all my quirks and foibles and would would make sure you know like for example that if I hadn't responded to and say he was writing a paper and I he knew I was editing it and I hadn't responded to it and gotten it back to him quickly enough he would send me a little email saying hey Steve have you had a chance look at that draft that I sent you you know and I go oh shit yeah I forgot about that so so so um he was immensely successful I probably shouldn't mention which which person it was because because you know all of my students I love them all but not all of them were equally successful and some of them needed a very careful managing style with a lot of handholding and others were very you know I could just let them do what they wanted and they came up with pretty good decisions on their own so so that's you know that was a lot of the trial and error was just getting to know individuals and realizing at some point that there is no such thing as a one size fits all way to manage a lab or probably anything you know whether it's a company or your classroom or anything like that you you really have to treat individuals as individuals and tailor and that that that does take a lot of extra work you know when we're talking about extra work that you put into teaching a class and you were I think you were asking me and by email you know how many of the students were just unteachable or just you could like I was unable to motivate yeah yeah um I would say the answer is none but the really hard ones were a lot of extra work you know if there was a student I could think of a few there was always a couple two or three students in a class of a hundred that would just trouble you can name them you can name them you remember their names I'm sure I can name them I think it a what in particular it was just a smart ask who is just always making negative comments about everything so not only was he was he negative about what we were doing but he's kind of bringing the other students down so I kind of resented him and and I was thinking about well what happened in the end he ended up taking uh my neuroengineering lab class and somehow he liked the first class the introductory neuroscience class enough even though he was so negative about it and constantly complaining about every little thing and he took the neuroengineering lab class and did a fantastic project and his wiki pd article that he wrote was a great one in fact I think it was it was about multi electrode arrays a subject near and dear to my heart um so this guy he certainly was not a dumb student he's a very smart person but he was just not motivated so he was one of the alumni that I interviewed I interviewed a lot of alumni by using a Google form I sent it off to my alumni and said what do you remember about my class what does it benefit you today did it influence your career choices what are you doing now you know where are you um and I got a good amount of feedback I wouldn't say everybody responded but quite a few people responded that he was one of them he's in industry he's he's at a startup doing interesting work and when he's he looked back on the class and I said you know what was memorable and he said he goes well you're suspenders you know just as a smart-ass joke because he had to make a smart-ass joke there because I always tend to wear suspenders and he goes no he said um honestly that was the only time I can think of in college where I was actually enjoying myself wow you know so that kind of gave me some insight into his what was going on there was probably some serious shit going on in his life yeah he was going through and getting making him what I considered to be a problem student and if at the time I had gotten to know him a little bit better I probably could have shepherded him in the right direction more quickly but that's a lot of extra work that's that are culling an effort that you refer to getting to know your students that well especially the troublesome ones most teachers have have a natural instinct to throw their hands up and say oh that is a problem student I can't deal with that person I'm just going to ignore them as much as I can and tell them to shut up you know and you have to really resist that uh and you have to ask yourself how much are you willing to put into helping them uh become motivated it is possible I honestly believe it's possible to motivate any student I don't think there's any student who couldn't be motivated if you give them the right kind of attention and the resources that they need hey you say in the book oh I don't have the quote in front of you you believe I mean you're you're a growth mindset believer and that we're all geniuses uh in some subject in one way or another and it's just a matter of of finding how to capture that and um nurture what I suppose yeah and then the corollary to that is we're also all really bad at certain things you know that uh that students have pluses and minuses just like professors or anybody um and the the aspects that any given student are really bad at may or may not be things that are important you know in the case of if it were algebra for me you know I wasn't terrible at it but I certainly wasn't great at it if student could a one of my teachers could have pulled me aside and said hey Steve I noticed you really blew chunks on that last algebra exam what's going on with your life there you know and I'm boy with they have had a lot of stories to tell when they got home you know I would have said oh yeah well my family is it it's screwed up um that might have stopped to do with it so they didn't my teachers didn't bother getting into my life at all they didn't they didn't try to get to know me personally they didn't hold my hand even my best teachers the few ones that were really good those four that I can count on one hand with a finger missing um they didn't really get to know me personally you know but they were friends we did stuff together in classes in class that was not required you know like I remember one of them joined our unicycle club and so we were writing unicycles in the homecoming parade together and stuff like that so Steve this is a great resource I mean I recommend it obviously to to the listeners and the reason why I brought up that it should be useful also in in you know self motivation is is because I truly believe that that I mean these principles can be implemented to set up your own learning system and at whatever stage of learner you are I do want to ask or just highlight one of my favorite and I'm glad I remembered to say this one of my favorite parts of the book is um and it's fairly inconsequential actually is now I have this image burned in my head of you writing a scooter around the society for neuroscience poster session floor to get around and I did because the poster session is it's such a big hallway and you make the point in the book that that was one of the best things that you did at a conference was investing in this little scooter that would fold up and you could just hop on it and ride to the other side in just a couple minutes where it would normally take 10 to 15 minutes just to get across the the huge floor and I'm trying to remember if I saw anyone on scooters at SFN and I it must have been you because I don't did you see anyone else on a scooter at that time it was only a a special purpose high price device that the sharper image you know that you couldn't buy them anywhere it was a razor yeah okay it was a razor you know it's okay and it was the first time they sold razors was it for an outrageous amount of money at the sharper image and they sub you know subsequently as I mentioned the book they subsequently were owned by every single kid under 10 yeah and a few yeah and me and I still have it it's right over there in my room with all my other mementos I can't really do even ride it but but the key thing is that it was it was a fantastic tool and I didn't care too much about how I looked I also have these roller blades that you can unclip the wheels from so so they become hiking boots when you unclip the wheels and that makes them very handy for conferences because you you get to the place where you have to climb into your seat down a long row of chairs you don't want the wheels to be on them anymore so you zoom over to the session where the count where the talk is going on and when you get to the door there's usually somebody who wants to check your badge and at that point the public started no skating in here right and you go oh sorry do you pop your wheels off to go no okay I'm on feet now well if you these days you would you'd be building your own probably building your own DIY drones and that's how you'd get from a poster to poster and to fly myself to the next talk fly yourself good idea well Steve thank you again and you know it's been a pleasure just having you on I feel lucky that you were number one guest on the show and I I too frequently feel lucky to have have had you accept my invitation and once again for 101 except it again so I'll see you in another hundred perhaps yeah great thanks a lot Paul it's been a pleasure talking to you brain inspired is a production of me and you I don't do advertisements you can support the show through patreon for a trifling amount and get access to the full versions of all the episodes plus bonus episodes that focus more on the cultural side but still have science go to brain inspired dot co and find the red patreon button there to get in touch with me email paul at brain inspired dot co the music you hear is by the new year find them at the new year dot net thank you for your support see you next time let me into the snow covers all the take me