Oh hey, yes, yes, hello it is your internet dad, this is Ologies, I’m Alie Ward, and you and me, we are
together here for the sake of pigeons. So, we’ve done episodes on ornithology and pelicans and
chickens and penguins and condors and crow funerals but pigeons, you don’t need binoculars or a
farm to stare at them. But would you want to? Will this episode gross you out with pigeon facts or
will you be googling pigeon adoptions? Either way, this episode is so mellow and so soothing and
exactly the opposite of the feral chaos that you might expect, tonally, from a show about pigeons. So,
stay tuned because we have a beloved studier of pigeons with us today who dedicated years,
decades of her life to observing these creatures and years hitting the books and pouring through
pigeon studies and even writing a guide about them.
So, we’re going to get to that in a minute but first thing, thank you so much to all the folks at
Patreon.com/Ologies for making this show possible. You can join for a dollar a month and I may
read your questions to ologists. And thanks for making this show possible by supporting by wearing
Ologies merch from the link in the show notes, or just by leaving a review which you can do for zero
dollars. Boy howdy, let me tell you, I read ‘em all and then I serve you up a just-left one such as this
one from Kiibkey whose review said:
We found it y’all, the perfect podcast, everyone else go home.
Kiibkey, thank you, we did it. But I’m going to stay here for a minute because we got a pigeon
episode. Okay, another listener, 123454567ű9io0oHow’dIDoThat? wrote a four-star review that
said:
Why so long, girlie? Alie’s great and all but... WHY ARE YOUR EPS SO LONG?
123454567ű9io0oHow’dIDoThat?, I’m hearing you out, I’m taking action this week because this
bounty of pigeon stories was a real chunker so we split it into a compact, two-volume set and next
week will be just wall-to-wall Patreon pigeon questions. So, instead of one two-hour episode, we’re
going to be reasonable about it. So, let’s get into Part 1. Oh, I love these episodes so much! This was
such a delight to work on, one of my favorites.
So, this guest is a science communicator who writes the comics Bird and Moon and has written
several lauded and respected books such as Birding is My Favorite Video Game: Cartoons About the
Natural World from Bird and Moon, and Expedition Backyard. And I’ve been aware of her recent
book, A Pocket Guide to Pigeon Watching: Getting to Know the World’s Most Misunderstood Bird since
its 2021 release and Birding magazine calls her “A leader of the flock.” She studied pigeons from
every angle to bring them into our hearts. So, we logged on, we had a lovely video chat from my LA
studio to her Boston home base. Many, many thoughts and feelings I’ve had about pigeons remain
forever changed because of this.
So, prepare for facts about their origin story, how they make it home, pigeons that save lives,
whistling pigeons, nest strategies, where baby pigeons are hiding, who called them rats with wings,
whether or not they will give you a disease, pet pigeons, fashion pigeons, pink pigeons, doves
versus pigeons, eating pigeons, extinct pigeons, spy pigeons, and more. So, peck at a stale pizza
crust and let’s coo over best-selling author, lifelong pigeon nerd, and wonderful person and
columbidologist, Rosemary Mosco.
----------
2
Rosemary: Okay, I’m Rosemary Mosco and my pronouns are she/her.
Alie: I don’t want to freak you out, but we asked our patrons for questions for you ahead of time...
Rosemary: Yesss.
Alie: And we got 57 pages of questions.
Rosemary: Pages!
Alie: 57 pages of questions for you. [laughs softly]
Rosemary: Okay, okay. So, I have the next four days [Alie laughs] to look in the pigeon minds.
Alie: yes. This is how excited people are about pigeons, which is great.
Rosemary: Aww, that makes me happy.
Alie: And we had some people asking, "Is this the lady who does comics about pigeons and wrote a book
about pigeons?” So yeah, there are also people who mentioned you by name, but I just think it’s
funny that you’re the lady that does comics about pigeons. I hope that’s an okay thing for the world
to think of, you know?
Rosemary: Dude, if that’s my legacy... That’s incredible, I’ll take it. I’ll take it.
Alie: Do you know that you’re a columbidologist?
Rosemary: Now I do.
Alie: You are!
Rosemary: I used to just say pigeon fan but columbidologist... Love that. That sounds official.
Alie: And I’m sure it rings a bell with the genus and things like that.
Rosemary: Absolutely. Yeah, the pigeon family, Columbidae, and then the genus of the city pigeon, Columba.
Alie: So, there you go, you’re a columbidologist. Can you walk me through a little bit of when pigeons
just cooed and clucked their way into your heart?
Rosemary: It’s been a slow build. I grew up in a bunch of different cities in Canada and the US and my dad is
from the Lower East Side in Manhattan and grew up with very few birds, pigeons being one of
them. So, when you’re kind of a naturey kid, but you’re in the city, you can't help but notice the
pigeons. Kids in the neighborhood would bring me sick pigeons and I was already kind of a little bit
of a pigeon girl but then I started looking more into the human history of pigeons and it utterly
blew my mind. So, just the more facts I pick up about them, the more obsessed I get.
Alie: And the human history of pigeons, I know that’s a big can of city garbage to feast on. [“What? I love
garbage.”] But I feel like I know them as rock doves and so, they’re kind of rock-colored, from what
I understand. Is that where they come from? Do they just nest on cliffs in the wild? What’s the deal?
Rosemary: Yeah, they do. They’re called rock pigeons or rock doves or, you know, a million other names, some
unkind because they naturally would nest in holes in cliffs. So, like, you know, I’ve seen them in
majestic seaside settings where there will be a pair of them cuddling up in a little, like a cave, on
the side of a cliff. So yeah, they’re native to rocks.
Alie: And then at what point did they decide not to live on the side of a cliff near the seaside and just get
a pied à terre in the city?
Rosemary: [giggles] That is a question that I really struggled with in my book [Alie laughs] because the
problem is that our relationship with pigeons goes back to before people were writing things down 
3
[Alie exclaims] that have been lasting. So, I spoke to an Egyptologist and an assyriologist and tried
to find all of the archaeological evidence that there was.
So, we know that Neanderthals, which are our ancestors to a certain extent, were eating this type
of wild pigeon 75,000 years ago. And then we know that people in the area where pigeons are
domesticated, which is this area called the Fertile Crescent in the Middle East, were farming at
around 12,000 years ago. And then at some point between then and about four to five thousand
years ago, which is around when we start getting written records of these domesticated pigeons,
people domesticated them and it probably happened many times and in many different places
which, when I learned that, ruined my dream of it being like a moment [Alie laughs] where
someone reaches out and a pigeon reaches out its wing and they shake hands and it’s like a
connection. That’s not how it happened. It was much messier.
Alie: Did you hope that there was one pigeon ambassador who bridged the gap and then just like a
lightning bolt of love and connection?
Rosemary: Like music... I think about the movie The Black Stallion where they connect. They like, we stare into
their beady little orange eyes and the music swells. [dramatic music “The story of a legendary horse
who could only be tamed by a young boy’s love.”] No, it did not happen that way.
Alie: [laughs] Was there a point that you thought, “I have enough pigeon facts that this is my next book.”
I have to say, as someone who is in science communication, you are living every science
communicator’s dream. You’re writing and illustrating comics and books for kids about niche
science topics, beloved by all. [Rosemary giggles] I guess I should back up to your origin story. Was
there a moment when, like, a librarian and you touched wings and then all the electricity of
communication flowed through you? What happened?
Rosemary: Okay, there was actually a moment.
Alie: [squeals] Really?!
Rosemary: Yeah, yeah, yeah. It didn’t happen like pigeon domestication. [Alie laughs] So, I grew up in the ‘80s
when newspaper cartoons were a big thing, and I had every collection of Calvin and Hobbes and
The Far Side, and I loved all that stuff and then I also like nature. I figured at some point, I’d put one
of those two things aside, probably the comics because that seemed the less lucrative one, and then
go on and have a very serious career.
And then I was at a nature camp, I’m trying to think of how old... I must have been about 8, at this
nature camp that brought in a fellow from the local nature museum named [phonetic] Mike Levier,
who I have since emailed with and he’s delighted to hear that this meant so much to me. But he
said, “Okay, I’m going to give us a talk about ancient life,” and he put this huge pad of paper down
on the ground and we all clustered around it and then started drawing the history of life from
single cells until now, all in cartoon form, doing voices. Like, [squeaky voice] "Help! I’m
Anomalocaris,” or whatever. My eyes must have just popped out of my head, and I said, “This is
something you can do? You can be funny but also talk about nature?”
Aside: Okay, side note, I can't let a word like ‘Anomalocaris’ just drift by without knowing what
that is, and I looked it up and it’s a shrimp-like creature that was as long as a high school basketball
player is tall, like 6 feet long, a ferocious predator and it live 500 million years ago. Its mouth was a
cone-like wheel of teeth and the name Anomalocaris means ‘weird shrimp.’ Sometimes, I think
Linnaean taxonomy was engineered just to deliver sick burns to dead things that can't object.
Anyway, Rosemary learned from this camp counselor Mike that sci-comm can be fun.
Rosemary: Yeah, and it just blew my mind, and I was totally hooked.
4
Alie: Did you ever ask him for any kind of photo of what he draws? Do you think you remember it like,
I’m sure pretty accurately if it made that much of an impression, right?
Rosemary: It was pages and pages. Every time he’d fill up one page, he’d say, "Okay, now we’re going onto the
Triassic,” and he’d flip to another page. It was astonishing. I mean, even now that this is sort of
what I do, the idea of doing that and drawing that many things, live, for kids is intimidating. So no,
I’ve since wrote to him and said, “This was really incredible and you’re amazing,” and he was like,
“Oh I’m especially happy that young women got excited about science through what I did,” because
there are so few of us.
Aside: And Rosemary, I tell ya, in the sci-comm community, has such a high level of cred and
respect. When other science communicators congregate, whether online or in a real-life nerd
brigade, people are like, "Rosemary Mosco, she’s doing it right. She says pigeons are cool, pigeons
have gotta be cool.”
Alie: Was there a point where you felt like you collected enough pigeon facts where you’re like, “This
book must exist.”
Rosemary: I knew the barebones of the story and I wanted to find out more and I had already been watching
pigeons for years and years. So, I was pitching different ideas to my editor, my editor was saying,
“Oh, that one’s okay. I don’t know about that one.” This is Danny at Workman, he’s an incredible
editor, he’s the best. But then, I thought, you know what I really want to do is a book called A
Pocket Guide to Pigeon Watching, and I pitched it and I thought there is no way this is going to
happen. [Alie laughs] And then I was out at a cafe with a couple of friends who are also science
communicators, and I got an email saying, “Yes, we want this.” [Alie gasps] And I just thought, “No
you don’t! [laughs] What are you talking about? [Alie laughs] You surely don’t.” It was a complete
dream project; I was really thrilled.
But day one I was like, “Okay, time to go and squirrel myself away and read and read and read
everything and talk to everyone.” I put way more into this book than I think I expected. [Alie
laughs]
Aside: So, let’s dig into that work like a delicious, oil-stained bag of cold French fries, shall we? So,
pigeons and humans have this long history, but are there pigeons in the wild? Are there forests
that purr with pigeons? Are there cliff-dwelling birds that look like born and raised New Yorkers?
Or are pigeons just our winged goldendoodles?
Alie: Is that brilliant rainbow ring something of our own manipulation like a dachshund or a big, weird
poodle, you know?
Rosemary: We have done plenty of weird manipulations to pigeons, but the shiny neck ring is natural and
when you see a pigeon that is sort of blue-gray and has pale, blue-gray wings and two dark bars on
the wings and has that shiny neck ring, that’s the natural look of a pigeon. [“Stop it.”] But whether
there are any pure wild ones like that out there anywhere is an open question.
So, there was recently a study that came out with some researchers up in the Outer Hebrides in
Scotland and they were looking at some of the most remote pigeons in the world. These are, you
know, pigeons who are nesting on cliffs, there are all these seabirds all around them, everything
looks very wild. And they tested these pigeons and they found that they were mostly not domestic
pigeons, but there was still some domestic pigeon in there. So, humanity's reach into the pigeon
cannot be overstated. [Alie laughs] We are everywhere where the pigeon is.
Alie: And you were saying that Neanderthals would enjoy them for a meal, which, I think people still eat
pigeon, right?
5
Aside: Okay, side note. So, people have eaten pigeons for thousands and thousands of years, and
yes, even near the caves of Gibraltar buried in sediments 40 to 60,000 years old are bones of the
rock dove with human-like teeth marks, evidence that Neanderthals were climbing cliffs and
making pigeon McNuggets.
Why are they delicious though? Well, okay. So, pigeons are good flyers, which means that their
tissues have more myoglobin for carrying oxygen for all that activity. So, pigeon meat is juicy and
kind of mineral-tasting. Who doesn’t like pigeon? Well, farmers because these things just cruise
through and raid their crops like airborne stoner roommates. Why don’t more farmers just farm
pigeons if they’re so good and so tasty? Well, as we learned in the Chickenology episode, chickens
come out of the egg fuzzy and able to peck at worms. Pigeons, not so much. So, pigeons are altricial
and like human babies that can’t go buy their own burritos; pigeon babies are naked, they’re
helpless and they’re hungry for a while so that means they’re harder to farm. Also, they have way
fewer babies; one pair might have a dozen a year, whereas a chicken is just like a vending machine,
it can pop out, like, 30 times that or an egg a day.
I found out that LA used to be home to the largest pigeon farm in the country, with like 100,000 of
them in this giant coop condo right on the banks of the LA River, what’s now near Frogtown.
Tourists, they’d come and flock to see them. One writer described the thrum of their gentle chorus
like “The ceaseless dashing of waves upon the beach a long distance away." Then okay, why is this
riverbank location now a parking lot for broken train cars? Well, because in 1914, a flood on the
then-unpaved LA River washed all these birds away, just splintering their coops and drowning
them in the raging current and scattering the survivors into the wilds of the city. But yeah, pigeon
farming sucks and it’s hard to make money. So now, if you want to eat a pigeon, it’s going to cost
you 25 bucks a pound, more than double the price of a live lobster. So, we started just using
pigeons for other stuff.
Alie: And then at what point did we decide that they were not only dinner but also like, a coworker?
Rosemary: It’s hard to say. So, they were probably originally domesticated for food. And when we eat pigeons,
mostly what we eat is squab. So, if you've ever seen squab on a menu, little alarm bells should be
going off in your head because that's a fancy word for pigeon. What you're eating is a baby pigeon
that is just about to fledge. So, it's still tender, but it hasn't worked up, you know, the tough flying
muscles. [Alie whimpers] I know, I know. And so, that is what people most enjoy eating. So, they
were domesticated for food and also then we were collecting the fertilizer and using that to
fertilize fields too.
But I think that as with any animal that gets domesticated for one reason, humans pretty soon start
going, “Ooh, that one's got a fun mutation. Ooh, I'm gonna make that one. That one sounds cool.
That one flies cool, I'm gonna make more of those.” It's sort of our natural instinct to mess with
animals in funny ways.
Aside: And sometimes not so funny. I’m sorry animals.
Rosemary: So, I think it probably happened pretty early, it’s hard to say exactly when but again, we’re looking
at ancient, ancient history but some of those breeds, those fancy pigeon breeds are quite old.
Alie: What kind of fancy pigeon breeds are there? What flavors of pigeon are there, visually, let’s say?
I’m familiar mostly with, there’s kind of some brown speckled pigeons, brown and white, there are
the white ones that they release at expensive events such as funerals and weddings, and then I’m
familiar with the gray ones. What other kind of fancy pigeon breeds are there?
Rosemary: There are more fancy pigeon breeds than you could possibly imagine. [Alie laughs] So, basically
when you’re looking at a flock of pigeons, you should think about a pack of stray dogs or a colony 
6
of stray cats. What you’re looking at is the, kind of, mixed breeds, the ones that didn’t have traits
that made it a little too hard for them to survive in the wild and kind of interbred and became
mutts. So, that’s what’s going on with a pigeon flock. That’s why they’re all different colors, is
they’re a mix of fancy breeds and fancy colors.
If you think of, like, a hairless dog, if a hairless dog gets out into Anchorage or something and is
running around, it’s going to be very cold, it’s going to have trouble surviving. Similarly, there are
pigeons that have feathers that block their vision or have feathers all over their feet that are
incredibly long, so they essentially have sort of four wings and walk kind of awkwardly. There are
pigeons that flop over backwards when they try to fly and do backflips and there are all these
different types of pigeons. Some of those traits would not have survived as well in our feral
populations. There are naked-neck pigeons, which are bred to have no feathers on the neck...
Alie: [softly] Why?
Rosemary: ... for some reason. There are pigeons that have sort of a Salvador Dali droopy face called
Scandaroons, there are pigeons with tiny beaks called owls. Basically, anything you could do to
mess with a pigeon has been done. My favorite breed is one called the Archangel which is as cool as
it sounds. It looks like a medieval angel. They took the shininess of a pigeon’s neck and spread it
over its entire body.
Alie: WHAT?!
Rosemary: So, this entire bird is just shiny and glossy and spectacular. It’s really incredible. We’re all familiar
with at least a few dog breeds. The only reason we don’t know 200 pigeon breeds is because
pigeon keeping is a little less popular now but there is no real difference in terms of elaborateness
of these wild breeds.
Aside: Okay, so the rock pigeon was indigenous from Europe to North Africa and into Asia, but as
we started to tinker and make them into our own craft projects, they spread out and we made
them weirder. I found myself down a pigeonhole on this Dutch website with breed names and
illustrations and yeah, the Archangel is this gorgeous purpley, copper, metallic along the body with
black and gray wings.
There’s also the Antwerpen Smerle which bears curly white chest hair feathers and a beak like a
parrot, which I thought maybe was just a lack of skill on part of the artist but no, they really do look
like that. The Brünner pigeon looks like if you stretched a gummy pigeon until its whole girth was
gathered at your fist at its throat and chest, it doesn’t look real. The English Pouter has wispy
feather snowshoes. The Bernburger Drum Dove, it has all black feathers that are shaped like a
vampire cape with the collar popped. Then there’s this Bookworms pigeon, also all black, it is
wearing this wide-brimmed beret of flattened feathers, it looks like a hat that a rich person would
wear to a royal funeral. Pigeons, you go so hard.
The English long-face has a melon like a beluga whale. Now, there’s this one pigeon who has a body
of curly feathers like a chia pet, and this breed is simply called Haircut, like an ironic nickname for
some cousin who has had winglets since birth. The French baguette pigeon, 100% looks like a
flamingo, but inverted so all white with pink accents, like “Honey, I shrunk the flamingo and now
it’s a sexy pigeon.”
And if you think Archangel and French Baguette and Haircut are weird names, I’d like you to listen
to this list and decide which one is NOT a real pigeon breed, okay? There’s one imposter. Here we
go: Glorious, Hamburger Skull, Thurgauer Monk Pigeon, Wiggertaler Colortail, White-Winged
Wiener, Monday, Magic Hatchet, Wig, Bone Scour, Bernese Mountain Dog, Bohemian Ice Creamer,
Significant Damage and Romanian Nudist... Do you have your pick? Only one of those names is fake, 
7
and if you guessed Romanian Nudist, then you’re wrong. That’s an actual pigeon name. Hamburger
skull? Real pigeon name. Bernese Mountain Dog is a real pigeon name. The only one I made up was
Magic Hatchet. So, White-Winged Weiner, 100% real.
I was researching this whole aside on a plane and for at least an hour, like over a whole state, I had
been scrolling through so many illustrations of exotic pigeons and if you guessed that no one dared
make small talk with me during this, you’re correct. No one talked to me. I wanted them to.
Jeopardy, make a pigeon category. Please let me read the clues.
Alie: Are these mostly kept as friends and pets? Like, you’ve got a couple of parakeets right, or parrots?
Is it similar to that or with all of these different breeds is it like, this one’s great at eating this kind
of worm, this one’s going to deliver an Amazon package to you? Do they have specific uses or are
most of them just like, “This is a beautiful bird and I love it.”
Rosemary: They absolutely have different uses. I was going to say again, it’s like dogs and cats but I don’t
know that cats [both laugh] you know, we don’t have messenger cats really or guard cats. But yeah,
so there are all of those fancy ones that I described and those are kept for different purposes, often
just for show. So, like a show dog, they’ll be kept so that they compete at pigeon shows and show
how good you are at breeding fancy pigeons. So, there are all these fancy ones that are really just
supposed to look good, and some people keep them as pets. But then there are breeds that make
particular sounds, there are trumpeters that make, like, a trumpeting sound [warbling type of
cooing sounds] those are kept just because they sound cool. Then there are the ones that are sort of
trick flyers. They have a mid-air neurological event and they kind of flip over backwards and
tumble through the air and those ones are kept so that people can compete in terms of who can fly
the most interesting birds.
Aside: So yeah, lots of pigeons have full ass feathers on their feet, like Hobbits look foot-bald by
comparison. Oh, and those roller and tumbling pigeons who do the fighter jet rollbacks mid-air?
I’ve got horrible news. Some research suggests that it’s from a genetic neurological problem that
can endanger the birds, and not just because they’re trying to impress you like doing kickflips in a
parking lot.
Rosemary: And then there definitely are homing pigeons which were bred, at one point to pass messages, now
mostly to race so people race them. So, that’s sort of a more utilitarian purpose. And then there are
utility breeds which are bred to be big and meaty. So, there are so many different reasons why you
would breed all of these different pigeons. It gets, pigeon breeding gets incredibly complicated.
There are people whose entire lives and family histories are in breeding these pigeons.
Alie: I know that in cities, rooftops would sometimes have pens for pigeons and people would go up and
keep them. Is there something about pigeons, their size or their ability to home, that lends itself to
domestication? Do they like coming back into the pen at night like chickens like going into a little
barn? Are they easier than, say, if you had an African grey parrot or a parakeet that’s just like, "Bye,
fuck off. I’m out.” [Rosemary laughs] Do they like coming home?
Rosemary: That was a direct quote from a parrot. That was really, really accurate, for their personalities.
[laughs]
Alie: [laughs] You know what? One of them out there can probably say it. [parrot says, "Fuck off.”]
Rosemary: Yeah, that is an extremely good question because there are so many animals out there where you
look at them and you think, “Hey! That would be a useful animal, right? Like, I want a pet giraffe, it
can, you know, reach my kite when it flies up to the top of the tree,” or whatever. 
8
But the animals that we domesticate, we domesticate for a complicated series of reasons. And one
of the reasons pigeons were domesticated is they were kind of, like, primed for domestication. So,
they're pretty chill, they're not violent. You won't get mauled by a pigeon unless you're a seed.
They sound kind of nice and quiet, [soft cooing] they don’t migrate. So, the passenger pigeon, which
is native to North America, was used by many Indigenous peoples as a food source but it moved all
over the place so you couldn’t domesticate it and have it sit. But the Columba livia, city pigeons,
they will come back to the pen at night, they’re very loyal to their mates so they’ll always come
back to their nest, and they will stick around and they’ll kind of hang out. So, there are reasons why
we domesticate the animals we do and with pigeons, it was because they were prolific and also
pretty chill. And then I guess people also thought they tasted delicious.
Alie: Delicious little guys!
Rosemary: Yeah.
Alie: I’ve read in the past and I’m absolutely probably misinformed, that part of their navigation is due
to a magnetic substance in their beak? I’m sure that’s outdated but how are they finding their way
back? What’s their little GPS?
Rosemary: I thought this would be an easy question to answer. [Alie laughs] I thought, I'm sure you've had this
experience, but I thought, “Oh, you know, I'm not really clear on how they navigate home. I'm
gonna ask a couple scientists, they'll all agree.” I know, I was a fool. “And then they'll explain and
then I'll just write it down.” It turns out we don't really know, which I think is really fun because
there's so much about pigeons that is awaiting future scientists and explorers. We have hints about
what they probably do. So, we know that they use probably like, the position of the Sun, and they
probably have memorized a few different locations and they may have a magnetic sense and
maybe they can smell a bit on the wind or something. There's probably various different cues they
use. Probably they use different cues when they're closer to somewhere than farther away. And
homing pigeons tend to be trained a little bit to find their way home from farther and farther
places.
Aside: So yeah, okay, pigeons can fly up to 90n miles per hour. They average like, 50 or 60, but
they can go up to 90 if they have to haul ass. Homing pigeons can navigate back to the coop over
1,000 miles away – That’s way farther than the length of Italy or California from top to bottom.
Navigating home, halfway across Australia, with nothing but a pigeon brain? I guess– Oh, and their
ears.
So, this is still a mystery though some recent research, like the 2019 paper “A Putative Mechanism
for Magnetoreception by Electromagnetic Induction in the Pigeon Inner Ear” found that,
electroreceptive molecules in pigeon ear hair cells may help detect magnetic fields. There’s this
one prominent columbidologist at the University of Utah who thinks that these magnetic molecules
in the inner ear help detect the direction, intensity, and polarity of the Earth’s magnetic field. But
also... shrug.
Rosemary: But the bottom line is that we don’t really know what they’re doing. They’re doing many things at
once; they probably have their own preferences from pigeon to pigeon in terms of how they
migrate. [“Don’t take the Beltway because at this time of day, there’s going to be a– Go any way you
want.”] But no, there are no easy answers. I was really hoping for one [Alie laughs] but we can't
make an automated pigeon GPS quite yet.
Alie: That’s actually more exciting than if we did know. I think that’s cool that pigeons have mysteries.
9
Rosemary: Yeah! I mean, that makes me so happy because not only are they way less boring than people think
[Alie laughs] but you know, I was watching some pigeons today out in the city and just looking at
them and thinking, there are things in there that we don’t know! Tell me your mysteries!
Alie: If you’re sending messages back and forth with a pigeon, did you come across anything about how
they know where to go? Is it just between a point A and a point B and they just have two houses, or
two pens and they just go back and forth?
Rosemary: Yeah, sort of. It's a lot less fancy than we think. So, the use of pigeons to carry messages has been
going on for thousands of years. They carried the results of the first Olympic Games, for example,
and Genghis Khan had a whole pigeon messenger relay. They were being used all the way up
through World War I and World War II and carrying messages that were so important that they
won various medals for it. There are so many medal-winning pigeons that I couldn't put them all in
my book, which makes it sound like they're forging out on this brave adventure and picking their
way along. The secret is that pigeons are just very loyal to their homes.
So, what happened was the pigeons would be carried very far away from their home and they're
sitting in this little cage going, “Okay, I'm ready to go home. I’m ready to go home. Anytime...
anytime...” [Alie laughs] [sad music “There’s no place like home... There’s no place like home.”] And
then you release a pigeon with a little note and the pigeon goes, "Okay, I’m going to make my way
home incredibly quickly and I’m just going to get there.” So, it’s a one-way thing. So, you kind of
have to have pigeons on both sides, relaying messages.
Alie: Aha!
Rosemary: But once you’ve got that, it’s incredibly fast, incredibly accurate. So, the fellow who started the
Reuters news agency, Reuter, he started with a pigeon relay system between Aachen in Germany
and Brussels in Belgium, and he used pigeons to fill this gap in the telegraph line. So, he had
pigeons on either side passing news information back and forth and they really, really, really are
very good at it.
Aside: So, they are one-way fliers, just let loose to find their way back. Recently, this one pigeon
was found trying to look inconspicuous around a shipping port in Mumbai, when onlookers
noticed writing on its wings and a microchip on its leg. So, it was captured and held for eight
months on the suspicion of espionage before being cleared and pardoned because it was just a lost
racing bird from Taiwan. So now, it just lives in Mumbai, they just released it, like a pro athlete
who had to trade in fame and pressure for a life of just quiet normalcy.
Also, in World War II, the US employed over 50,000 war pigeons who carried messages to and fro
with a success rate of 90%. One of these pigeons saved the lives of 100 men, as the story goes, for
delivering a message about an imminent bombing, like, right in the nick of time. They named this
bird GI Joe, which I’m sorry, is horrifying because even pigeon breeds have names like Hamburger
Skull and Significant Damage and this creature hustles for the cause in a war zone to save 99 of
your friends from getting killed by Nazis and you call this bird, GI Joe. Embarrassing, you can do
better. Oh, and the thimble-sized message tube that they attached to their legs was called a PG67,
and if you look that up, you can still buy them from vintage military equipment sites in case you are
a big pigeon nerd or you have bad cell service.
Alie: What about when you are seeing them in the city, I’ve always wondered what are they eating? You
mentioned something about how they probably won't attack you unless you’re a seed. So, where
are they finding seeds? Do they see an everything bagel and that just tides them over for, like, a
month? What are they eating?
10
Rosemary: Yeah, pigeons definitely have their preferences. So, they don't really want to be eating all of our
trash, but the thing is that pigeons naturally eat a lot of grains and legumes and what do we throw
on the ground a lot? It's grains. You know, we'll drop a hotdog bun, or we'll drop an ice cream cone
or an everything bagel. So, a lot of human food is grains and legumes and that's what we drop on
the ground and that's what they like to eat. So, they will eat any trash that has that stuff in it. Which
isn't to say that that's the healthiest meal for a pigeon, but so long as there's a steady supply of that
stuff, there will be city pigeons.
Alie: I’ve sometimes seen people throwing out breadcrumbs to pigeons in parks or the parking lot of the
Hollywood post office. Every time I’d go to check my mail, there would always be a pile of
breadcrumbs and 30,000 pigeons and I was like, this is someone’s daily habit and joy and that’s
cool with me. But it is kind of like they say with ducks? You shouldn’t feed ducks bread? Is that
because they have a completely different diet? Like ducks like algae and pigeons like grains?
Rosemary: Ohhh, okay. I have a section in my book about whether you should feed pigeons and what you
should feed them, and it was the hardest thing I’ve ever... It’s about two pages, three pages and I,
you know, was stressing myself to the extreme trying to get the wording right on this because
feeding pigeons is such a minefield.
So, the more you feed pigeons the more pigeons there will be. Basically, when there’s a lot of food,
the pigeons say, "Hey, it’s time to have a load of babies,” and they can have many, many, many,
many babies, like a dozen or more babies in a year. So, the pigeons are saying, “Okay, this is great,
there’s food. Time to reproduce.” Which is a problem because then there’s more hungry pigeons.
[“Lots and lots of babies.”]
At the same time, the thing about pigeons that is different from ducks is that pigeons are a creature
that has been so manipulated by humans that we are arguably responsible for them and now
they’re lost and alone and hated in the cities and hungry. And I think that’s one reason people feed
them, but they also feed them because it’s a nice nature connection and sometimes they’ll bond
with other people over feeding the pigeons. So, I was really stressing over whether you should feed
them. One thing we know is that telling people “Don’t feed the pigeons,” doesn’t really work.
People will go at night, and they will sneakily feed the pigeons. People love to feed pigeons. There
are battlegrounds over pigeon feeding all over the place.
I think where I came out with it was that if you’re going to feed pigeons, we are responsible for this
creature, but you need to feed them responsibly so if you’re going to feed them you need to make
sure that you’re feeding them healthy grains and legumes. And then you should also maybe think
about all the poop that’s being produced as a result of your feeding. So, I think the bottom line is
the best thing you can do for pigeons is to make sure their environment is safe and to adopt any
pigeons that could potentially be pets and are lost and alone and injured and can't survive out in
what we call the wilds. So, there are other better ways to feed pigeons.
Aside: Like one-on-one, in a committed relationship, maybe with cohabitation with the pigeon.
Also, don’t harass pigeons, because it makes you a dick, and also, it’s against a lot of regulations of
the Fish and Game codes.
Now, is feeding them stale bread a form of harassment? It really depends on each individual
pigeon’s preference for croutons, I’m sure some don’t like it. But in some places, like Las Vegas,
London’s Trafalgar Square, Venice, Italy, and Phoenix, and Paris, and Toronto, and Singapore, it’s
not legal to feed them anything, even the finest delicate pastries. But what if you love them, and
you want them to experience the rest of your nachos? WWACD? What would a columbidologist do?
11
Rosemary: But I also feel complicated about just blanket telling people “Don’t do this thing.” I think it’s just
something we all need to think a lot about. I don’t feed them. I instead am that person who runs
around with a cardboard box in her car, scooping up the injured pigeons and taking them to
rehabilitators. That’s how I choose to contribute.
Alie: And there are rehabilitators that are just like, "Bring ‘em in.” Do they nurse them back to health
and re-release them? Or do they rehome them to people who are excited about having them?
Rosemary: It depends. If they're feral pigeons, usually they'll release them out in the wild, unless they're so
injured that they wouldn't be able to survive. But one thing that happens is that people will dump
their unwanted pet pigeons out or their food pigeons. So, you'll see big meaty, they're called king
pigeons, these white birds, that will often get dumped and people think they're saving them from
being eaten. But really then what they're doing is putting a bird with a giant “Eat me” sign, sitting
out, you know, on the street. And then racing pigeons also often get lost. I just rescued one a couple
of months ago. The young racing pigeons will get lost and then none of those birds can survive in
the wild the way a feral pigeon can. So, those ones need to be adopted.
Alie: And what does a racing pigeon look like compared to a city pigeon?
Rosemary: It looks really similar. They kind of look... This is definitely anthropomorphizing but to me, they
look beefier. So, they sort of look like if your friend is like a gym bro, [Alie laughs] there’s a bit of
gym bro look to them, so they look really sleek and they kind of have like a deep chest for their
flying muscles and they look very smooth and very fancy, sometimes they have fancy colors. But
the best way to tell is they will have a couple ankle bands. [“Ohhh fancy, fancy.”] It depends from
place to place but one of them will say, this is where this bird is from, and then one of them will be
like an RFID kind of tag that will make it so that when the bird flies home and gets to its roost, it
gets scanned and then the race managers can tell how fast and far that pigeon went. It’s wild.
Alie: We’re living in the future.
Aside: So, these look like little plastic anklets and it’s just bonkers to me to have a scannable
microchip on a bird and then I realized how many of us have Fitbits and Apple watches just so that
we can do this to ourselves like, "Okay, you closed the rings. Good job! Get back in the cage!”
Rosemary: Yeah. We're living in a world in which we make pigeons race for us and then we scan them. Like,
it's mind-blowing. And pigeon racing is so interesting because even though it's sort of less popular
in some places like North America than maybe it used to be, in places like China, you can sell a
pigeon for more than a million dollars.
Alie: Noooo!
Rosemary: Yeah. When I was working on my book, there were pigeons... I wanted to put, you know, the most
expensive pigeon anyone has ever purchased, and it kept getting replaced by more expensive
pigeons. [Alie laughs] I think finally, there was one that sold for like $1.2 million. I'm sure that's
been surpassed. But these things are big business, people bet on these pigeon races.
Aside: So, you may know 2020 as the year you first realized everything could go to shit overnight,
but it was also the year that a pigeon named New Kim sold for $1.9 million after a bidding war
between two Chinese buyers who went by the pseudonyms Super Duper and Hitman. Now, for
more of this kind of gossip, you can see the 2022 documentary, Million Dollar Pigeon, about a
pigeon race offering $1.3 million in US, of prize money, with the top bird waddling away with
$200K, which I guess kind of answers my next question.
Alie: Can you make good money if you race pigeons? 
12
Rosemary: I don’t know! I mean, I think it depends on the pigeon-racing culture near you. I think probably but
I think the money is a lot of it’s on betting the pigeons and then, I don’t know, maybe selling the
top... I’m not really sure where you make all the money from with those pigeons, but I think it’s
similar to horse racing and...
Alie: We know that you’ve got a whole weird gambling ring.
Rosemary: [laughs] How did you know? Was it the cooing?
Alie: Yeah, it was the cooing. [laughs]
Rosemary: Shh, quiet, quiet. And also, the fact that I’m actually three inches tall so I’m like a tiny jockey that
rides on the pigeons. [Alie laughs] Yeah, that’s true. That did give it away.
Alie: A little obvious. What about, okay, when it comes to their poop, you mentioned their poop and...
good for fertilizer, bad for cars, bad for hairdos. Is it a toxic kind of poop or is it just garden-variety
bird poop?
Rosemary: It depends on how much of it you’re getting exposed to. One thing I was really interested in finding
out was, can the local pigeons get you sick? And of course, poop is one of the main reasons that
people fear pigeons. A lot of the reasons why we have this idea that pigeons will get us sick stems
all the way back to New York City in the 1960s when there was a fungal meningitis outbreak and
health officials blamed it on the pigeons. The pigeons did not cause it, but unfortunately, there was
a lot of fear that was fostered. And it was also a time when pigeons had fallen out of favor and no
one was using them for the purposes that we had previously been using them for; we weren't
eating them, for example, or giving them medals. [Alie giggles] So, there was sort of this period of
time, which is relatively new in the history, you know, the thousands of years history of pigeons,
where people started to think, “Okay, these things are really gross and they're going to harm us.”
Aside: All right, so I know this whole time you’ve been cradling a cup of tea, staring out a window
wondering “Per annum, how many pounds of poop does one pigeon make?” And that number is
25... 25 pounds per pigeon or around 12 kilograms. What's in all that poop? Tiny killers? Well,
yeah, sure. Feral pigeons, they can have up to 70 pathogenic organisms on their body and in their
poop but according to the January 2006 paper “Human diseases caused by feral pigeons,” only
seven of those pathogens have in fact been demonstrated to be transmitted to humans.
And yeah, as for that meningitis smear campaign, it’s been six decades since they’ve been
acquitted, and there was this 1964 New York Times headline boldly declaring “Pigeons Exonerated
In Meningitis Cases By Italian Specialist.” So, the backstory here is that one New York-based doctor
said that the Cryptococcus neoformans, which can cause meningitis, was found in Manhattan’s
pigeon droppings. But then this Italian scientist wrote a paper clarifying that that same
microorganism is found everywhere, from fruit to air, and soil, and cows, and horses, and dogs, and
cats, pigs, and chickens. The New York Times quoted him as saying [mild Italian accent] “Why then
you gotta pick on the pigeons?” Everyone looks down on these bobbling, nude, city birds, just
recoiling from suspected bird plagues.
Rosemary: And that’s not really true. There are a number of scientists who have looked at the diseases that
pigeons and their poop carry and there are definitely ways to get sick from pigeons. But so long as
you're not digging your hands into their poop or breathing it in a lot or really interacting with it, or
so long as you're not immunocompromised in some way (you should always be careful if you’re
immunocompromised) you're pretty safe, you just have to wash up.
I have this memory seared into my head of going out for brunch with a cartoonist friend of mine.
And we were both biking there, and we pulled up to the brunch place and I said, “Hey.” And he said, 
13
“Hey.” And then a pigeon that had been kind of holding in its poop because it was probably sitting
on eggs, jumped out from an air conditioner, you know, nest above us and pooped the most poop...
[Alie laughs] I don’t know where it kept this much poop, but I was covered in poop, my bike was
covered in poop, just covered and then there was this moment and then I said, "Well, see ya!” And
my friend said, "See ya!” [both laugh] It was this unbelievably stinky amount of poop, but I
survived. So, I think really, try not to get exposed to huge amounts of it. Try to be cautious but you
know, a little bit of pigeon poop around you is going to be okay, for the most part.
Alie: They pooped on the right person because who would be more forgiving than you?
Rosemary: You know, that pushed my forgiveness. [Alie laughs] I’m Canadian, I’m very polite, I’m very nice,
but I really wanted those mimosas and instead, I got a head full of pigeon poop.
Aside: So, Rosemary has stories about pigeons for days and obviously they have a spot really deep
in her heart and the very opening of her pigeon guide bears the dedication:
To my dad Vincent Mosco, who grew up in a Manhattan tenement and only knew three kinds
of birds: the gray ones, the little brown ones, and the seagulls. Dad, thanks for helping me see
the connections that make the world work. Here are some more connections for you.
So, this was published in 2021 but she recently created and posted a really beautiful comic about
grief that really stuck with me, especially if you’ve been up to date on the last few years of my life.
Alie: You know, I didn’t want to ask this too early in the interview, but I know the book is dedicated to
your dad, who you lost about a month ago, right?
Rosemary: Yeah, about a month ago.
Alie: I’m so sorry. As a member of that club, it’s really hard.
Rosemary: Oh, I’m sorry, it is the worst club. Every time someone says that to me, I think, "Oh, but I don’t want
you to also be in this terrible club.” But yeah, my dad, he grew up on the Lower East Side in
Manhattan and he actually grew up on a street that is now known as Mosco Street after my
grandpa, his dad, who was a community activist. My dad spent his whole life fighting for justice and
equality and labor rights, and you know, traveling all over and really trying to get people to care
about the downtrodden. His connection with pigeons, I think, really fostered my interest in them.
And that’s partly why I wanted to make this book was because I wanted to talk about the
neglected, unloved people and pigeons, and why we should care about them. So yeah, every time I
see a pigeon, I think about him.
Alie: What did he think of the book?
Rosemary: He thought it was great! He was one of those dads where everything I did, everything, no matter
how small, he would post about it on Facebook, he would tell everybody, he would say, "I can't
believe this, look at this! Rosemary did this! My daughter is so amazing.” So yeah, he was just a
cheerleader and it’s hard to not have that cheerleader now. So, yeah.
Alie: I’m so sorry.
Rosemary: Thank you.
Alie: I love that the book is dedicated to him.
Rosemary: Yeah, there was no way it couldn’t be and it’s... [chuckles] He was a sociologist and I always said,
"That’s not my kind of thing, I’m going to do animals.” And then I think it’s really funny that I made
this book that is really about sociology and history and then has a little bit of bird facts in there,
snuck in.
14
Alie: [laughs] And we donate to a cause of your choosing too. If you want to split the donation, we can do
one in his memory to a certain cause or pigeon charity, we can do more than one. So, if there are
any that are off the top of your head, let me know, and if not, you can think about it and email us.
Rosemary: No, I know two right off the top of my head. Great Lakes Pigeon Rescue and Palomacy which is a
portmanteau of ‘pigeon’ and ‘diplomacy’ are two incredible pigeon rescues who have done
amazing work. In fact, Great Lakes Pigeon Rescue at one point came to the rescue of some pigeons
that I found out about because I did a TV interview in Chicago and it was one of those goofy, like
“This wild lady made a pigeon book. That's so weird.” [Alie laughs] And this guy emailed me right
after and said, “My father just passed away and he left me this loft of like 40 pigeons and I was
going to just slaughter them and now I have all these pigeons. But you mentioned people will
rescue them, what do I do?” And I reached out to Great Lakes Pigeon Rescue and then a couple
weeks later, you know, they were like, “Okay, huge influx of pigeons. Please adopt them!” And so,
they helped us out. So, these people who rescue pigeons, is there anything more thankless? They're
just the sweetest people.
Aside: So, we’ll donate to that charity in memory of her forever cheerleader and fellow
birdwatcher, and pigeon appreciator, her father, Vincent Mosco. The wonder he fostered in
Rosemary goes on to inspire all of us. I’m so inspired by her. So, when you next see a pigeon, think
of Vincent Mosco, send a good thought Rosemary’s way.
That donation, again, went to the Great Lakes Pigeon Rescue, which is a foster and adoption
network for non-releasable rescue pigeons and doves, because they’re the same thing, in the Great
Lakes region. They’re pigeon owners, adopters, enthusiasts, rehabilitators, and admirers, and
they’d love for you to be a part of it. You can find out more at GreatLakesPigeonRescue.org, which
we will link in the show notes of course. And that donation was made possible by sponsors of the
show.
[Ad Break]
Okay, as a reminder, this necessitated a two-part episode because there were that many great notnot-smart questions about pigeons and we have a lot of pigeon influencing to do just yet. But let’s
continue with a line of questioning that honestly, pigeons don't want me to bring up. This is the
question that Barbara Walters would ask with one eyebrow raised, despite the pigeon’s publicist
just sweating in the corner.
Alie: Well, you mentioned their nests and I lived in an apartment building once where I came home, and
at the end of my hallway were a few sticks with one lonely egg on it. It was obviously a nest of
some sort, and we had open windows in the building, and it was the laziest nest I’ve seen in my life.
It was like a whisper of a nest; it was a gesture toward a nest.
Rosemary: A soupçon of a nest. [“Oui, oui.”]
Alie: It really was just like, it was the most abstract painting of a nest you can imagine. It was four twigs,
one of them might have been a pretzel, I don’t know, just a lonely egg. And it was a pigeon nest and
there’s that thing going around, it’s like, “Why don’t you ever see baby pigeons? Obviously, they’re
all robots.” Baby pigeons, two questions. Number one, can you get bird mites if you have a pigeon
nest at the end of your hallway? Luckily, I didn’t, and the landlords gently rehomed it to the fire
escape and closed the window. But also, baby pigeon’s nests, why are they so carefree in terms of
their parenting? [little jingling sound]
Aside: That was my dog Gremmie, speaking of bad parenting.
15
Rosemary: I mean, you don't want them nesting on any inside spaces that you have, but I don't know how
common that is. I do have lots of advice in my book for discouraging them from making nests on
surfaces and how to do that. But they really are very bad at making nests, right? [Alie laughs] Sort
of sketch-a-nest.
Okay, so I also laugh at those posts. There's a whole Twitter account called like Bad Nest Pigeons or
something like that, [Alie laughs] I forget what it's called, but there's whole accounts dedicated to
mocking pigeon nests. And while I think it is really funny, especially when you consider, you know,
weaver birds and all kinds of birds that make these elaborate, complicated nests, the thing you
need to remember about pigeons is that they would nest sort of on flat surfaces in these little holes
in cliffs. So, they don't need to make a fancy cup that's going to keep their egg from falling out of a
tree, they just need to put maybe one or two guard sticks to kind of keep those eggs from rolling
out.
Also, because humans shaped them for thousands of years, we weren’t breeding them to be good at
this. We were breeding them to have lots of babies and be delicious and, you know, fly real fast and
make fancy coos. So, there's no evidence to support this, but there's probably something about, you
know, the fact that they were kind of altered to live in our structures, which is what they do. They
live on our balconies, and they live above our air conditioners and that kind of stuff. So, they're
doing their best. They're just throwing down a couple of sticks to keep the eggs from rolling away.
That said, they will reuse spots, they will poop, and they won't clean out the poop. Those nests can
get pretty gnarly. So, it's understandable if you don't want one, you know, right outside your house.
[Alie laughs]
Aside: Listen, can you get gamasoidosis, an infestation of avian mite from a pigeon or sparrow or
starling nesting on your eves? Sure. Has a friend of mine who got that said it was worse than being
haunted by poltergeists and frankly harder to get rid of? Yes. Yeah. And according to the 2020
paper, “Occasional human infestations by feral pigeons' ectoparasites: Two case reports,” should
you see a doctor if you have several pigeons on your terrace and present with “continuous
intensified itching for six months?” Yeah, you should. So, if two pigeon lovers have decided that
your bedroom window box is the best place to raise their growing family on top of four poorly
placed sticks, don’t burn the house down. But maybe you could relocate it to an area less close to
your sleeping face.
Speaking of rearing more of these beautiful, beautiful weirdos... Is it true that there are no baby
pigeons? No one ever seems to see them, so are they even real? Are pigeons even real or are they
just very convincing feathered spy cameras?
Alie: But the baby pigeons are out there, right? What do they... What do they look like?
Rosemary: Oh, tiny robots that make kind of like a servo noise. [servo motor sounds] No, I’m kidding. [both
chuckle] They are out there! They’re out there and you can find them. So, I did an interview with a
local reporter at one point where he said, "Where are the baby pigeons? There are no baby
pigeons.” [Alie laughs] And I met up with him and within five minutes I had found him a baby
pigeon and he was like, "You’ve got to be kidding me!” [Alie laughs]
So, the secret with pigeons is that again, nesting in these little holes in cliffs, they tuck their babies
away, so they keep their babies kind of hidden in these niches until the babies are ready to fledge.
So, you can find baby pigeons often by sound. [high-pitched squeaky chirps] So, people call the
squeakers, they make this very high-pitched weird kind of whistling sound and when you hear
that, you know there’s baby pigeons tucked away somewhere. They look really funny. They look
like a lumpy potato. I think they’re cute, I understand if other people do not think they’re cute. 
16
And then by the time they fledge, you can still tell the babies from the adults by looking at a few
subtle signs like the lumpy thing over their beak called the cere is not so lumpy in the baby ones,
for example. But usually, by the time they fledge, they leave the nest, they’re ready to fly, they’re
ready to do a lot of pigeony things even though they’re a bit awkward about it and people don’t
tend to notice that those are in fact baby pigeons.
Alie: They’re just kind of undercover because they’re so mature?
Rosemary: Yeah, I mean they sort of remind me of me in middle school or something where I’m like, “Yeah, I’m
doing a great job at this. I’m totally an adult.”
Alie: Their eye shadow game isn’t quite on it, like mine in middle school. [chuckles]
Rosemary: And they’re on TikTok all the time. [laughs]
Alie: Carrying a clarinet case to school. [both laugh] Looking at their feet a lot.
We have one million questions from listeners, and we are not going to answer all of them but we’re
just going to do our best... Is that cool?
Rosemary: Yes.
Alie: Sweet.
Rosemary: Oh, I’m so excited, I’m so excited.
----------
So, next week we’ll ask your brilliant questions to our birdly expert, and meanwhile, feel free to find
Rosemary’s book, A Pocket Guide to Pigeon Watching: Getting to Know the World's Most
Misunderstood Bird. You can also find her online handles at her name, or linked in the show notes,
and check out her comics, Bird and Moon, also linked! We’ll be back with more feral facts with her
next week!
And, side note, if you need classroom-safe episodes for kiddos of all ages, we have Smologies which
are shorter digests of classic episodes, and stay tuned because we have kind of an exciting
announcement in the next few weeks about that. But those are all up at Alieward.com/Smologies.
To become a Patron of the show and submit questions, join us at Patreon.com/Ologies for a buck or
more a month. You can find Ologies merch at OlogiesMerch.com. Erin Talbert admins the Ologies
Podcast Facebook group, Aveline Malek and The Wordary make our professional transcripts, Kelly
R Dwyer makes the website, Noel Dilworth is our scheduling producer, Susan Hale is our managing
everything director and does extra research also, Jake Chaffee is our assistant editor, and our Magic
Hatchet is lead editor Mercedes Maitland of Maitland Audio. Nick Thorburn did the theme music.
And if you stick around until the end of the episode, I tell you a secret and this week’s it’s that I am
currently recording this at 12:56 AM in a guest room on a Hawaiian island but I’m in a closet
underneath a blazer because the invasive coquí frog on the island. They’re so loud. I looked it up,
they’re up to 100 decibels which is as loud as a lawnmower or a subway train. So, I’m hiding in the
closet, meanwhile, Jarrett is snoring on the other side of it. I’m here visiting Jarrett’s family, I’m also
doing a couple of Field Trips, including this visit to a farm co-op that’s growing these traditional
Hawaiian plants for food security, and I was invited there over a year ago by a Native scientist
who’s really passionate about it. I’m really excited to make that Field Trip episode so stay tuned for
that.
Also, I feel like I’ve got to record these frogs for you. Do you want to hear the frogs? Okay. I’m going
to try and get you some of this frog audio. [whispers] That’s me leaving the closet. [door slides,
croaking sounds become audible] Okay, so these are these invasive coquí frogs. They’re native to 
17
Puerto Rico but they’re called coqui frogs from what I remember because they go “Co-qui, co-qui.”
And I’m on the big island. I’m near Hilo right now and apparently, some coqui frogs came over in
some potted plants in the ‘80s and now they’re everywhere at this part of the island. And yeah,
some people are obviously very upset by them because they’re as loud as a lawnmower. Others love
the sound of them but they’re horrible ecologically so there are ways people try to get rid of them
but at this point it’s just like, they own Hawaii. Anyway, these are coqui frogs... [croaking continues]
It’s also raining, and it sounds like one of those mediation apps where you can just dial in different
sounds... All right. Okay. Next week, more pigeons. Berbye!
Transcribed by Aveline Malek at TheWordary.com
Links to things we discussed:
Human activities and landscape features interact to closely define the distribution and dispersal of
an urban commensal
Cunning Neanderthals hunted and ate wild pigeons
Pigeons, a Darwin Favorite, Carry New Clues to Evolution
The Far Side Comic Strip by Gary Larson
Where Did Pigeons Come From?
Pigeon Iridescence: Physical and Functional Properties
Rare wild ancestors of feral pigeons found living on British and Irish islands
Limited domestic introgression in a final refuge of the wild pigeon
Americans used to eat pigeon all the time—and it could be making a comeback
Squab Producers of America
Nutrition Facts and Calories for Squab
Pigeon Breed Gallery
BONKERS pigeon breeds
Trumpeter (pigeon) - Pigeon Wiki - Fandom
Cropper Tumbler Pigeon (video)
Pigeon Breeding: Genetics at Work
Following the sun: a mathematical analysis of the tracks of clock-shifted homing pigeons
Magnetic compass helps pigeons find their way
Dr. Elizabeth Carlin’s pigeon research
Urbanization predicts flight initiation distance in feral pigeons (Columba livia) across New York
City
Widespread genetic connectivity of feral pigeons across the Northeastern megacity
The pigeon strut in slow-mo
Urban pigeons losing toes due to human activities
18
L.A. Was Once Home to the World's Largest Flock of Pigeons
Magnetoreception in birds
Magnetoreception: A Dynamo in the Inner Ear of Pigeons
A Putative Mechanism for Magnetoreception by Electromagnetic Induction in the Pigeon Inner Ear
German city issues coronavirus pigeon-feeding permits
A park where people have been going to feed friendly pigeons since the 18th century - Parque De
Las Palomas in San Juan, Puerto Rico
NYC: It is not illegal to keep or feed pigeons, but a violation may be issued for failing to clean up
unsanitary conditions that result from this activity.
Occasional human infestations by feral pigeons' ectoparasites: Two case reports
Gamasoidosis
Pigeons Exonerated In Meningitis Cases By Italian Specialist
Human diseases caused by feral pigeons
Million Dollar Pigeons Official Trailer 2022
Pigeons Get a New Look
PG-67 WW II pigeon message vial
Cunning Neanderthals hunted and ate wild pigeons
Pigeons, a Darwin Favorite, Carry New Clues to Evolution
Rare wild ancestors of feral pigeons found living on British and Irish islands
Nutrition Facts and Calories for Squab
1
Columbidology Part 2 with Rosemary Mosco
Ologies Podcast
April 24, 2024
Oh hey, it’s someone with your same name but a very different online presence, Alie Ward. Here we
are, Part 2, pigeons. You loved Part 1 and so did I but if you haven’t started with that, it’s linked so
easily in the show notes and you’re going to want the basics about pigeons, bad nests, good
parenting, pigeon breeds, what they eat, your pigeon alter ego name, why they like cities, how to
love them, and so much more. That’s Part 1. Okay, if you listened to that, let’s get right into Part 2
with this pigeon expert, creator of Bird and Moon comics, the author of the book, A Pocket Guide to
Pigeon Watching: Getting to Know the World's Most Misunderstood Bird.
But first, before we do that, thank you so much to every patron we’ve ever had for making this show
a reality and for submitting enough questions to make this a thrilling two-parter. You can join at
Patreon.com/Ologies for as little as a buck a month. The upper tiers can even submit audio
questions we may play on the show. Also, thank you for getting your summer merch at
OlogiesMerch.com, we do have bathing suits if you need them. And for no money, you can support
the show with a review because I’m sure to read it, like this one that was just left by cccc716, whose
review said:
This podcast is the antacid for my existential dread... Also, slime mold would be cool.
Thank you so much for that cccc716 and agreed, we do need more slime mold in our lives. We’ll do
an episode on that eventually. Thank you to everyone who has ever left reviews.
Let’s get right into Part 2 of your questions about nose barnacles, true romance, unusual fluids, war
heroes, escapee pigeons, de-extincting pigeons, Las Vegas pigeons, pink pigeons, and so much more
with author, science comic artist, highly lauded and adored science author, and second-generation
pigeon advocate, columbidologist, Rosemary Mosco.
----------
Alie: We have one million questions from listeners.
Rosemary: Yes! I’m so excited.
Alie: We are not going to answer all of them but we’re just going to do our best. Is that cool?
Rosemary: Yes! Oh, I’m so excited. I’m so excited.
Alie: James Nance from Fort Collins, Colorado says:
“Hey Alie, this is James Nance from Fort Collins, Colorado. Why are there no professional
sports teams named after pigeons? I feel like that’s a missed opportunity considering how cool
they are. And subquestion: Who do I need to send a letter to to start a petition to make this
happen? Thanks!”
Rosemary: James, yes. Do it. [Alie chuckles] I’ve never heard of one, I’m heartbroken that this doesn’t exist, and
I need this swag. So, I’m on board, we need to do this. It’s a true injustice.
Alie: Sweet. Change.org is about to hear about this. We’ll get it going.
Rosemary: Yes, absolutely.
Alie: Kyle Rees, first-time question-asker, says: 
2
“Hey there, Alie. First-time question-asker Kyle from Tacoma, Washington. I know that
pigeons and doves are the same thing, but how did one get classified as magician’s best friend
and the other one a trash bird? I mean, really, pigeons have such, much more magical
coloration! Help me understand this.”
Aside: Okay listen, not all of your dove questions were this magical but many of you patrons
wanted to know the distinction between pigeons and doves, all of us needed to know, including
Mark McPhillips, Sara Rocero, Saira Manns, Sam Y, Earl of Greymalkin, Les Chats Gourmands, Sarah
Metzger, Teresa & David, Elie Zwiebel, Ashley Stroup, Dave Brewer, Nita Chen, Kate DuHadway,
JdubyaS, Jacqueline Church, Jasmine Liu, Kate Bates, Joanna Polk, GK Gurley, Molly Geisler, Eating
Dog Hair for a Living, Edward Rice, Leah Rebecca, and Megan M, first-time question-asker, for
Simon, who is the world’s biggest pigeon fan, they say.
Alie: So, dove versus a pigeon, any idea how magic got involved?
Rosemary: Ooh! I don’t know when magic appeared, but I will tell you that when people have a trained white
bird, sometimes they have a species that we will call a dove and sometimes they just have a white
pigeon and people can't really tell. Wedding releases are often just a big ole pile of pigeons that
people are hucking into the sky.
Alie: [through laughter] Really?
Rosemary: Yes, absolutely, white fancy pigeons. If you go to Honolulu, all of the feral pigeons there, many,
many, many of them are white and it’s because so many people get married there that people
release “doves” and what they’re releasing is these white pigeons and then there are white pigeons
everywhere. [“It’s a tough call... They’re so different.”]
So, pigeons and doves, they are the same things because that’s a kind of sneaky thing to say. There
are some species where we commonly call them doves and somewhere we commonly call them
pigeons, and then there are some where we commonly argue back and forth about what to call
them, like the rock dove or rock pigeon, the Columba livia, city pigeon.
What's going on is that English-speaking people have sort of two words for the same thing,
probably because of the Norman conquest; the French came over and introduced the word pigeon,
the word pigeon, and before we had this old English word ‘dove.’ So, we had two words for the
same thing. And then as English-speaking people traveled around the world and met these
creatures, all of which are in the pigeon and dove family, Columbidae, they would point at one and
go, "That looks like a pigeon. Okay, that’s a dove,” and then they developed these common names
but there’s no evolutionary connection between all the pigeons and all the doves, this is just a
random assigning of names. So, it’s not a scientific division between pigeons and doves and that’s
why I think it’s reasonable to say pigeons and doves are the same type of thing.
But at the same time, the creatures that we call pigeons and the creatures that we call doves are
still unique in terms of different species having their unique characteristics. But yeah, absolutely,
when Noah hucked the bird out the side of the arc, [Alie laughs] sounds like a homing pigeon to me,
I’m just going to say. You threw a pigeon out there and the pigeon went, "Hey, I’m going to go find
some hotdog buns... [“The hunt is on.”] Bring ‘em back.”
Alie: I mean, hotdog buns, who doesn’t love one? Ask a pigeon, maybe it’ll share. Who knows?
Rosemary: [laughs] I don’t think they’re good at sharing. We should have bred them to share their hotdogs.
Alie: Just like, “Go nab me a hotdog bun from someone eating one, bring it on back.”
Rosemary: [laughs] “I’ll give you a medal.”
3
Alie: “Yeah, give me a bite.”
Aside: Augh, eating a hotdog bun with a pigeon, Lady and the Tramp style, a dream.
Alie: You mentioned the bump on the beak and Mad Madame Mim and The Bloated Toad wanted to
know, in The Bloated Toad’s words: Why do some pigeons have those bulbous face protuberances
on top of their beaks around their nose holes? What are they doin’ with ‘em?!?! They want to know.
Rosemary: We don’t know! [Alie gasps] Which again is an exciting pigeon mystery. It’s called a cere; it’s sort of
a lumpy, fleshy thing that pigeons have over their bills. Males appear to have a slightly bigger one,
although it’s so hard to tell male from female pigeons that even pigeon keepers can't really do it
without a DNA test.
Aside: So, unless you speak pigeon and really would like to know, and the vibes seem okay to ask,
there’s really no good way to visually discern the sex of a pigeon or the gender for that matter. You
could try squinting at their nose lump, which is called a cere, but even that beak hump stumps
columbidologists. Rosemary explains...
Rosemary: We don’t know what it’s for. Because there’s a bit of a sex difference, we think that there might be
kind of like a, "Look at me, I have a bigger, fancier cere. I’m a handsome male,” thing going on, and
babies don’t have it. So, that’s one way to tell the younger pigeons is if they haven’t developed that
fleshy protuberance which makes their bill kind of look longer. But yeah, we don’t know. So,
someone please become a cere-ologist and tell us. And I want to know! Because it’s one of the most
characteristic things about pigeons.
Alie: Well, on the topic of genders and sex, Daniella Napolitano and Cynthia Zhou, and Chino wanted to
know: How do they tell? You said with a DNA test. Can you... get in their cloaca? Or no?
Rosemary: Yeah, they don’t have any external genitalia. Both males and females just have a hole called a cloaca
that everything kind of flushes out of and when they mate, they press their holes together, and kind
of shoot material through the holes. [“That’s hot.”] It’s called a cloacal kiss, which I think is
delightful. So yeah, they just have a hole, there’s no real way to sex them so you usually need a
blood test, or you know, if you’re keeping pigeons, they’ll lay eggs and then you’ll know it’s a
female. But sometimes females will sort of act in a more male role. It’s just really hard to tell.
They also split up their egg-sitting duties so male and female pigeons will both sit on the nest, but
females will sit on it overnight, for example. They’ll kind of alternate duties, so that’s one way to
tell. But this is a serious issue. So, when I was looking into the war hero pigeon, Cher Ami, who was
a hero from World War I who wound up carrying a note basically saying, "We soldiers are under
friendly fire, please stop shooting at us,” and Cher Ami wound up saving the day and saving all of
these soldiers.
When I was writing my book, I wanted to know if Cher Ami was male or female and I came across
this blog on the official US government site, this random guy’s blog where he said Cher Ami was a
woman or a female pigeon, and “we are ignoring the contributions of females to war.” And I
thought, I have to find this out. So, I reached out to the Smithsonian, and they said, “Because of the
pandemic, we don’t have the DNA test results back from Cher Ami’s taxidermied body, which is the
only way to tell. But we think Cher Ami is probably female so you can go with that in your book.”
So, I proudly called Cher Ami female in my book, in the first edition, and then the results came
back, and Cher Ami was a male.
Alie: Oops.
Rosemary: So, we can't even tell if we’re experts and we have the pigeon in front of us, what this pigeon is,
which I think is wild. Pigeons can tell but we can't tell.
4
Alie: I’m sure pigeons have their own way. Maybe it’s that bulbous thing in their nose, it’s just like a
[robotic voice] “Beep-beep-beep-beep-beep. That’s a boy.”
Rosemary: [laughs] Lady alert! Yeah.
Alie: Who knows? A bunch of people...
Aside: Cynthia Zhou, Daniella Napolitano, Olivia Lester, GhoulNextDoor, AZM, Sara Rocero’s friend
James, Neen, Sage Agee, Waylo, Katrina, Kate E, first-time question-asker Jamie and Mary McGann,
first-time question-asker, Deborah Gray who wrote: My friend, Kaylee, and I want to know: How
much sex do they have? And Sir Monkeyboy asked: Are they getting a little freaky with the
neighbors? And I’m assuming Sir Monkeyboy means the neighboring pigeons. So, all those folks...
Alie: ... Want to know about mating rituals and their courting and breeding behavior like puffing up their
chests? AZM wanted to know: Do the females enjoy this or do they mean it when they seem to be
saying, "Back off, you creeper?
Rosemary: Oh, I wish we could get into their heads, I’m so curious. They have really elaborate mating rituals
and it is a delight to see. So, if you have some time and you want to go look at your local pigeons,
now is a good time because a lot of them are kind of getting back into the breeding spirit after the
winter. Some of them breed all winter, but a lot of them don't. So, I was just today watching some
males doing their thing. It's incredibly elaborate.
So, it starts with males doing what's called the bow coo, where they will sort of duck and puff up
and bow and raise up and bow and raise up, and they'll do this coo... Let's see if I can do it. They do
a coo that sounds like [deep, trilled coo that rises and falls] [applause] and they’ll bow and bow and
bow and the females will sort of look like, “Why are you doing this?” [Alie laughs] But what’s
interesting is, they mate for life. [Alie gasps] So, you may be seeing a male bothering a female who
he hasn't, you know, yet connected with or you may just see like a paired-for-life pair of pigeons
where she's just acting kind of aloof. And so, he'll do that for a while and then they'll groom each
other and then they'll kiss but really, they're sort of like cramming their beaks down each other's
throats and simulating vomiting in each other's mouths. [Alie laughs] But it looks like a kiss so it's
really cute.
And then they'll mate, and the male will pick a nesting site and he'll stand there, and he'll make this
really weird sound that sounds like it's sort of like [deep, almost moo-like call] it’s sort of like the
coo but there's no trill. And I've heard that, and it's really weirded me out because it sounds like a
guy standing, you know, under my window going, [deep voice] “Woooo.” But it’s a pigeon and he’s
saying, "Check out this cool spot that I found,” and the female will go and start sitting there and
sitting on the eggs.
But the reason they go through all this ridiculous amount of bonding is because they are both
responsible for raising the babies and they can't really do it on their own and one of the reasons is
that both male and female pigeons make milk. [“I beg your pardon.”] So, for the first several days,
they’re both feeding milk to their babies and the babies need that, so it takes both the mom and the
dad. So, these bonding rituals do have a purpose even though they’re also funny.
Alie: Miiiilk? I know... Okay. Milk. Is that what they’re doing when they’re making out? Are they
pretending like, “Pretend I’m giving you milk. Pretend I’m giving you milk.”
Rosemary: Yeah, or regurgitating seeds from this region of the throat called the crop. You know, “Hey honey, I
have so much seeds and milk to offer you.”
Alie: But they’re simulating vomiting, they’re not actually being like, “Do you want a bite to eat?”
5
Rosemary: It’s hard to tell but from what I was able to find, they’re probably not actually puking a whole
bunch into each other’s mouths. But we’ll see, the jury is out on that.
Alie: And if they are, it’s none of our business.
Rosemary: Go for it. Go for it, kids.
Alie: They do what they want. But milk. Talk to me about pigeon milk.
Aside: So, this question was on the minds and in the throats of patrons Meagan Walker, Julia
Smith, Kristen Fuller, Jenny Chambers, Mandy Hobson, Becky Wilkinson, Matthew Walcher, and
two patrons, Carissa Quisenberry, and The Bloated Toad, would like a review of its taste but that, I
think that’s asking too much of any columbidologist.
Rosemary: Yeah, so pigeons convergently evolved the ability to make milk. You know, we make milk, they
make milk. There are some differences. All pigeons can make milk and they make it in this region
of their esophagus called the crop so they’re kind of secreting it into their throat and then they’re
kind of puking it into their babies’ mouths. It is a bit cheesier apparently than mammalian milk. I’ve
never actually seen it because the whole thing happens in a very subtle, puking, mouth-to-mouth
kind of way.
Aside: You know how it is.
Rosemary: But apparently, it’s a little bit chunkier. But the wild thing is that in both humans and pigeons, it's
stimulated by this hormone called prolactin so it's the same hormone. It also has fats and proteins
and, you know, immune-boosting things in it. So, it serves a really similar purpose, which I think is
really fascinating. They've sort of stumbled upon one of the same solutions that we have to helping
our babies get a lot of nourishment. They just do it by puking. [“Thanks, Mom. Thanks, Dad.”]
Alie: So, if they’re co-parenting, which is a beautiful thing... Any idea why they don’t just co-parent for a
season and then be like, "Well, this was nice, keep in touch,” and then find a new one? I mean, are
their lives like one season long or do they live to be, like, 10 and they’re always with the same
partner?
Rosemary: There just seem to be different strategies that birds will undergo. So, some birds will be
“monogamous” for life, but they’ll sort of, like albatrosses, they’ll have a mate for life but then
maybe they’ll go off and mate with a little friend off on the side or something. A lot of birds will
only stick around with their partner for a season. But for whatever reason, the strategy seems to
work out with pigeons where they will just stay together with a tiny amount of cheating,
potentially, but mostly very little. They will just be incredibly defensive of and loyal to their mates
for their whole life. If their mate passes away, they will get a new one. But people who keep
pigeons know that once pigeons are paired up, good luck gettin’ those two apart, they are totally
devoted.
Aside: If they are bonded for life, is that like for a year or 50? Either way, it’s going to be longer
than the average couple from Love Island, but how big of an emotional commitment is lifetime for a
pigeon?
Rosemary: They can live for, you know, 25 years potentially, some really long-lived ones. In the city though,
it’s a lot less than that. They’re being predated upon by peregrine falcons, they’re eating cruddy
food and, you know, there are cars and all that stuff so their romance might be a little shorter. But
yeah, I was not expecting to find pigeon romance this cute.
Alie: Augh! I had no idea. I figured because so many options in the city, [Rosemary laughs] people are
always looking for something else that they would just be one and done but that’s very beautiful 
6
and hopefully inspiring to people who think that romance is dead in general. [“I think our love can
do anything we want it to.”]
But so many people want to know about their fancy appearance, especially if they mate for life.
Mad Madame Mim, ton of others, Average_pi...
Aside: The Joyful Spitfire, TheDorkNextDoor want to know: What’s with the iridescence? And Mad
Madame Mim says: It's almost like an oil slick. Why are they so rainbowy? And Tiane Scott, firsttime question-asker asked: Is it just to be the most beautiful birds on the block or is it for mating or
what?
Rosemary: It seems to be a display thing. So, the iridescence gets more intense as they get a little bit older and
then when they’re showing off to their mates, they will inflate that crop, that throat region and
they’ll poof it out and they’ll show, "Look how fancy and shiny I am.” It’s really neat. So, it’s purple
and green but there is not a drop of purple or green pigment in there, it’s entirely just the structure
of the feathers and the way they look. Some of the feathers look purple from an angle and green
from the front and some look purple straight on and green from an angle. It’s just this beautiful,
shiny, structural thing.
Aside: For more on how colors can be structural and how feathers can be so shiny and beguiling,
you can please see our excellent Plumology episode all about feathers, which of course, we shall
link in the show notes.
Rosemary: And it seems to have to do with showing off and with that all-important purpose of getting a mate.
But I think it’s the most beautiful thing about a pigeon.
Alie: It is. It’s gorgeous. You can look at the same pigeon, which looks different as it kind of coos along
and struts about and then suddenly you get a nice little, ooh!
Rosemary: Yeah, the sun hits.
Alie: Almost holographic.
Rosemary: Yeah, and you’re in love.
Alie: And you’re in love, with a pigeon. Cat Baklarz wants to know: If pigeons are feral, why does LA
have mostly grey pigeons and New York has more brown/white/mottled pigeons? Have you ever
noticed that?
Aside: Patron Chandler Witherington also needed to know this, asking: What’s up with certain
cities throughout a country having certain color schemes of pigeons? I traveled to several cities
around Spain a couple of years ago and noticed every city had its own unique pigeon colors that
were more common. Chandler, firstly, you get my kudos for even noticing because friends, if you’re
traveling, you’ve got to milk it for every memory you can, you gotta crop milk it.
Rosemary: Yeah, that is a great question. This is one of the wildest things is this whole time we've been talking
about city pigeons as if they're this monolith of pigeon. But each sort of zone that has feral pigeons,
those pigeons are the descendants of whichever pigeons were initially brought there plus
whichever racing pigeons maybe, you know, stumbled over their wall undergoing a long race.
Pigeons don't tend to travel all that far. So, there was a great study that Elizabeth Carlen et al were
involved in a few years ago that looked at New York pigeons and Boston pigeons, and they don't
really mix. Like there's like a place in Connecticut where they're just like, “No, we're not going to
cross that dividing line.”
Aside: So, patron Victoria Hantout wrote in and asked: I heard that there are large families of
pigeons that stay in their region, one near DC and one near Boston/NY. True? And WHY? And yes, I 
7
dug up the 2020 paper Rosemary cited, it’s titled, "Widespread genetic connectivity of feral
pigeons across the Northeastern megacity,” and if you’re like, "Pray tell, what is a Northeastern
megacity?” The paper starts right off knowing that we’re all thinking that same thing and they
explained that a megacity is the region covering six large cities, in this case, Boston, Providence,
New York City, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Washington. Okay? It’s how the paper starts. But yeah,
the study says that the dividing line in northern and southern East Coast pigeons is likely due to,
"reduced urbanization across coastal Connecticut.” So, pigeons are like, "What do you want me to
do? You want me to go live in some woods where there are no Ziplocs of crushed Cheerios lying
around? [deep grumbly voice] Get outta here.”
Now, another 2021 study from the same lab titled, “Urbanization predicts flight initiation distance
in feral pigeons across New York City” looked at 519 pigeons to determine how close you have to
get to one before it scoots away from you and breaks your heart. In cities with more people and
traffic, that distance was shorter. They’re like, "I’m outta here,” quicker. This is also true for cities
with more peregrine falcons, like Chicago and New York. For more on the rise and fall of the
peregrine falcon and why it’s such a cosmopolitan urban bird these days, you can see our Field
Trip: Birds of Prey and Raptor Facts episode in which I meet birds that could probably kill me and
other ones who would lick my decaying bones.
Rosemary: So, when you’re looking at your local pigeons, what you’re looking at is the result of mixing of
particular bloodlines from that area. So, the pigeons that are feral in Cairo, in Egypt, those ones
have been feral for you know, maybe 5,000 years, 10,000 years, which is wild. And then you look at
the ones in New York and it’s a few hundred years. So, local coloration has just a lot to do with
which pigeons were dumped in that area. I mentioned earlier, if you go to Honolulu, one of my
favorite examples, if you google, "Honolulu pigeons,” [Alie laughs] you will get people feeding these
flocks that are full of white birds, or birds with bits of white in them and it’s because those ones
stem from wedding release birds.
Aside: So, I hope that answers your question patron, Tyler J Poeti who’d asked: Why don’t we
release pigeons when we get married? Turns out, we do. And Krista Jones, who wanted to know:
Why do we shun pigeons, but we invite doves to our weddings? Oh, pigeons are on the guest list,
many people just don’t realize.
And for some behind the scenes, I was researching this episode while on a plane to Hawaii to see
family and to record a few field trip episodes, and on the ride from the airport, I was looking down
at my phone, checking messages, unlike Chandler Witherington, and I realized just as I was leaving
Honolulu that I should look for pigeons! At that moment, I glanced at a telephone wire and there
sat two pigeons, one grey and one as white as a wedding gown.
Now, how much will that set you back? I let my fingers do the walking on my phone to a website
called “Bridal Dream Hawaii,” which advertised the releasing of two birds for the low price of $199,
which honestly, that’s probably the most affordable line item on any wedding budget in this day
and age, am I right folks? It also noted that "Doves need at least two hours before sunset to fly
home before dark. Sorry, dove releases are not available at sunset time.” So, you can have pigeons,
or you can have a sunset, choice is yours. But a sunset won't poop on you and it’s free. But I like the
thought that there are two rented pigeons attending a wedding and communicating with their
eyes, "Let’s get the fuck out of here and fly home.” Or even better, "Let’s quit our jobs in the
wedding industry and live behind the dumpster at the Circle K.”
Rosemary: So yeah, each population is unique and special so you should treasure your local pigeons. There
also seem to be urban-rural differences and latitude differences in terms of which pigeon wing
patterns do the best for reasons that we do not understand. So, you’ll see pigeons that have these 
8
dark, checkered wings more in cities and in higher latitudes. Why? No idea. So, there are also sort
of inherent factors going on. But yeah, your local pigeons are special and unique.
Alie: Well, you mentioned those higher latitudes and I never thought about this but how are they
surviving the winters?
Aside: Listen, we all wanted to know this, and by all of us I mean, Kaffeine who asked how doves
stay warm, and Stephanie Coombes who wanted to know: Is their habitat restricted by
temperature? Like, are they snowbirds like your grandparents who spend the winter in Arizona or
in Boca Raton?
Rosemary: It’s really incredible. So, you won't find them, you know, on the North Pole, but they have some
really good ways to stay warm. One of them is they hang around our buildings, which have all sorts
of toasty nooks and crannies, but they're also able to poof up their feathers and trap warm air. So,
they're kind of wearing a feather jacket at all times, and they're able to tuck in their little feets and
keep their little feets warm. They have different strategies. Usually, so long as they get enough
food, they're able to do pretty okay, which isn't to say you should throw a pigeon out into the
frozen wilds, but the ones near cities seem to manage and they, and they can be found all the way
up into Alaska, which is pretty amazing.
Alie: Into Alaska! Sienna asked, on the topic of city coloration, that they’ve been noticing way more... Is it
leu-cis-tic [phonetic] or leu-kis-tic [ph]? Do you know?
Rosemary: Oh yeah! I think it’s leu-cis-tic [ph] but that’s not totally the right term. So, what you’re talking
about are pigeons with lots of white in them, white splotches, which is a really good observation.
What’s going on with pigeons that have either an all-white body or bodies with white splotches is a
set of really complicated genetics that we have not fully decoded. So, for example, there's this one
pigeon coloration called recessive white where they'll have a dark eye and a fully white body and
that can happen. But then there are all these pigeons with just blobs of white on them, and there
seem to be different genes for each different spot where they can have different blobs. And those
are the descendants of birds that would have had, you know, white blobs or fancy white
colorations. And those are some of my favorite ones to see. But again, that's just sort of like pigeons
being mutts and having these colorations that, you know, are holdovers from fancy breeds.
Alie: Well, Sienna apparently is in Portland, Oregon so if you’re looking for white, blobby pigeons, [“Who
isn’t?”] they got a lot of ‘em up there.
Rosemary: Oooh! Tempting.
Alie: But this I thought was a very unique question. Feather Evans said: I was visiting a city and among
the little flocks of pigeons on the sidewalk was this bright pink, and I mean BRIGHT PINK
FLAMINGO-LOOKING PIGEON. My friend and I were stunned and confused but we love him and
still think about him to this day. Why was this pigeon boy posing as a flamingo?
Rosemary: Oh, I have bad news for you.
Alie: Oh! Oh no!
Rosemary: Well, somebody had a girl and that’s why that pigeon is pink. So, pigeons are not naturally pink
[Alie gasps] but people will dye them for gender reveals or for other purposes.
Alie: No.
Rosemary: There was an orange in Toronto and there was a pink pigeon in New York City and those were both
dyed and sometimes that paint can injure the pigeon. So, if you see a pigeon that is colored, what’s
going on there is someone bought a domestic white pigeon, put paint on them, released it, and now 
9
this poor pigeon is like, "Well, now I’m pink, and now I’m lost. Where’s my home?” So, you should
try to rescue that pigeon and bring it home. but yeah, please don’t do gender reveals with live
animals. It’s not a good idea.
Alie: I never would have guessed that. So, if you see a powder blue pigeon...
Rosemary: It’s a boy.
Alie: It’s a boy. But that pigeon might not be a boy, but someone is having a boy.
Rosemary: I know. [Alie gasps] I don’t think these heteronormative ideas are good to foist upon pigeons and
paint them.
Alie: [stifled voice] I don’t think so either.
Aside: I accidentally googled how much it costs to ask a pigeon to announce your child’s crotch
and somehow, I landed on a TikTok of an all-American family consisting of a mom, a dad, and their
four sons standing near a rural lake for the gender reveal of a fifth child, every member of the
family wearing custom T-shirts that said things like, "I’m your big brother.” But the father wore
one featuring two peanuts and the words “Team Nuts,” as a picnic basket opened to release white
pigeons and a few blue balloons, the mother seemed to hold back tears but maybe that was
because she remained the only family member not on Team Nuts. I don’t like this, and neither do
the cops.
So, a February 2023 New York Times headline read, "A Pigeon Was Dyed. Then It Died. Now the
New York City Police Department’s animal cruelty unit has opened an inquiry,” which it should
because last year, this poor pink pigeon was discovered frail and smelling of hair dye behind the
Shake Shack in Madison Square Park in New York. One rescuer told the New York Times that
“Someone had dunked it in the dye all the way to the top of its head.” Sadly, Flamingo (as it was
dubbed) didn’t make it through the week and it died, likely from ingesting the dye while trying to
clean its feathers despite rescue efforts.
Commonly, those dyed doves are King pigeons which are all-white breeds used in the meat trade.
In doing some rabbit hole, it turns out that a 2002, 9/11 memorial event in New Jersey couldn't get
a hold of professional homing pigeon handlers for its dove release, they were all booked, so the
organizers just bought a bunch of white King pigeons from a poultry market. And because squab
are baby pigeons and not good fliers. They were released and they quickly plunged into the
Hudson River or they hit windows, one perched on a 9/11 first responders construction hat at the
ceremony. The New York Times reports that the chief organizer for the Jersey City event said that
they did save a few hundred dollars because they didn’t rent them at premium prices and that
buying meat pigeons for this horrific scene to commemorate a horrific scene, ''Without a doubt,
beats what could have happened to them.'' Which he said was “becoming soup.”
What’s my point? Humans can be much grosser than pigeons. That’s my point. And I guess check a
Yelp page if you’re going to rent pigeons, please don’t treat them like Easter eggs because I promise
when your baby is a teenager, they will see pictures of their gender reveal and they’ll bring it up in
therapy.
Alie: A bunch of folks, Sarah Williamson, Valerie Bertha, Meagan Walker, Neen, AZM, and Chris Moore
wanted to know why their heads bob.
Rosemary: They don’t.
Alie: [excitedly] What?!
10
Rosemary: This is one of my favorite facts about pigeons. They look like they bob, right? But secretly, pigeons
are not bobbing their heads. What they're doing is they have a lot of neck bones. So okay, humans
have, you know, seven neck vertebrae, and when we're walking down the street, we have to make
sure that we're not going to step in dog poo or step on a nail or something. So, we're kind of
flicking our eyes ahead and keeping our eyes a few steps ahead to look at the ground and make
sure that we're not stepping on anything. But because pigeons have these really long necks, what
they do is they stick their head out and they kind of use their head like this probe where they're
sort of looking around making sure, “Okay, I'm not going to step on something bad,” and then they
bring their body up to meet their head. So, their head isn't actually bobbing back, it's that their
body is catching up with their head and then they stick their head out again and they continue to
do this motion where their head is sort of like this advanced guard making sure that everything is
okay.
So, they sort of bob their head forward, but they don't really bob it back and forth the way we think
they do. And there are videos on YouTube, thank the YouTube gods, of pigeons walking in slow
motion and you can see this happen. It's really fascinating. Where their body is going forward and
then stopping, and then forward and then stopping, and then forward and then stopping. So, it’s an
optical illusion.
Aside: So yes, I watched a video of this slowed down by ten times and if you train your eye on the
pigeon head, it stays in place like a gimbal or a Steadicam, and then the body is indeed what is
strutting. Just this fact alone can turn anyone into a rapt pigeon-watcher. Anyone you see sitting on
a park bench staring off into the distance may actually just be closely observing the biomechanics
of pigeon necks. They could also be having a personal life crisis and in a trance of their own mental
undoing, unrelated to pigeons and that’s fine too. Because honestly, we’ve all had those moments
sitting on a bench.
So, this next one was about pigeon public relations, asked by Charlotte Parkinson, Olivia Lester,
Haley K, Zoe Litton, Peregrine, Handrea, Storm, Sienna, Tea Danilović first-time question-asker,
pigeon rescuer Cynthia Zhou, Olivia Coppin, Pidgey Koto first-time question-asker, Essence,
Cassidy McKee, Mary Long, Sam Nelson, Andrea Devlin, who want to know about the haters, about
the pigeon-phobes. The Awkward Cactus asked: Why do people hate on pigeons so much in a
world where geese exist? Which honestly, let’s not bring geese into this right now. But yes,
Rosemary, as the author of the book, A Pocket Guide to Pigeon Watching: Getting to Know the
World’s Most Misunderstood Bird, is the perfect columbidologist to answer this for that long list of
concerned patrons.
Alie: I want to ask too about, oh my gosh, we have so many questions and I will wrap it up. A lot of
people want to know about calling them sky rats, about flying rats, about the bad rap they’re
getting. We have done a whole episode on Urban Rodentology about rats so if you want to call
them rats, listen to that one because it’ll make you like rats more. But who started calling them
that? And can you bust any myths on either disease vectors or... anything you want to get on a
soapbox for about this?
Rosemary: Yeah, I took a deep breath because I have so many thoughts. [both laugh] So, rats with wings is a
really frustrating expression and it’s a disservice to both rats and pigeons... and wings.
So, we don't know who started calling them rats with wings. This fellow Colin Jerolmack went and
looked at New York Times mentions of rats with wings, and he found someone in 1966, this parks
commissioner Thomas P Hoving, complaining about pigeons being rats with wings. And the reason
he was talking about them being rats is that he was talking about this local park called Bryant Park
in New York City that was full of these perceived social ills. So, you know, people struggling with 
11
substance addictions, and people who are unhoused, and trash and rats, and then these pigeons,
which were rats with wings. And so, he was kind of lumping all of this undesirable stuff together.
That's the first documentation we have of someone calling them rats with wings. And then Woody
Allen, [growls] in his movie Stardust Memories had someone call them, I think it’s Woody Allen
himself says [“No, it’s not pretty at all, they’re rats with wings!”] and that was kind of when it
entered the cultural zeitgeist. So, it’s hard to exactly pinpoint it but it’s pretty recent, this whole
rats with wings thing.
I find it really frustrating because pigeons are not the threat that we tend to think that they are
disease-wise, although, again, you should exercise some caution. They're really not a big problem.
Also, interestingly, although rats can be a really troublesome invasive species, pigeons don't seem
to be an invasive species. Everybody just assumes they're an invasive species because they're
everywhere and the reason they're everywhere is because we are looking at them and they are
where we are at. [Alie laughs] They don't go, you know, into remote areas, they don’t go into
redwood forests, they go where we are. They want to be where we are, [“We loved your cooking.”]
and their ecological impacts seemed to be pretty minimal. Although there was a case in the
Galápagos where pigeons were removed from the Galápagos Islands for fear that they would get a
local native pigeon species sick.
So, there are some potential impacts, but mostly they're pretty chill and they're not a big problem
ecologically. So, I don't think it's fair to call them rats. And also, they're very different. They mate
for life, I guess both rats and pigeons make milk. But that's kind of it.
Aside: Again, listen to the Urban Rodentology episode because Dr. Bobby Corrigan is an angel on
Earth, below Earth. He can tell you all about New York’s sewer superhighway and I do cry about
the beauty of rats loving and caring for each other in that one. And it’s not an animal’s fault that
they are successful in our cities. They are doing a big slay and literally leaving no crumbs.
Alie: Also yeah, they’re feral. It’s because of us and, kind of, our abandonment of them, right?
Rosemary: Yeah. And you know, when I say we, I want to be careful because, you know, definitely certain
peoples of the world are the ones who carried pigeons all over the place and released them here.
And so, for example, you know, the passenger pigeon, which was this, this beautiful and delicious
species that Indigenous people in North America used to consume and used to sustainably manage,
that is a pigeon where colonists came over and basically went, “Why are you managing these? Why
aren't you eating them all at once?” and ate all the passenger pigeons to death and kind of also
brought over the Columba livia pigeon. So, there's also been this sort of ecological manipulation
from colonization that is one of the reasons why pigeons are all over the place and why the
passenger pigeon, alas, is no more.
Alie: How different anatomically was the passenger pigeon? Obviously, we don’t see them anymore,
they’re extinct, right?
Rosemary: Yeah, they were bigger, they had pointy tails; they looked pretty different. They would build little
nests in trees. Although I've seen the nests, they're okay... [hesitantly] They're okay. [Alie laughs]
They're fine. [laughs] But yeah, they were different in anatomy, they were different in behavior,
they were different in sound; they were different in a lot of ways, but they were still in that pigeon
family Columbidae, and they were still apparently this delicious and really important food source
for a lot of people. And yeah, as colonists kind of destroyed their habitat and also ate them to death
and they became more rare, then these highfalutin people in New York City started to pay extra
money to eat these rare birds.
Alie: Noooo!
12
Rosemary: Eat the last few passenger pigeons. I know, it's wild to think about.
Alie: Noooo.
Rosemary: Yeah, and it was a pigeon called Martha. Yeah, not really sure.
Alie: Did someone have her domestically, or him? Because I don’t think they had DNA testing back then,
to my knowledge.
Rosemary: Oh, she was in a zoo. And I think male and female passenger pigeons looked pretty different, unlike
the city pigeons.
Aside: So, passenger pigeons got their name because they were in huge numbers, possibly three
billion of them, in North America and would pass over in giant flocks. They were the most
numerous bird in North America up until the mid-1800s. They had delicate-looking beaks and
coloring kind of like a robin, with a ruddy breast and grey and black back and wings. The flocks
used to snack on farmers’ crops and there were so many of them naturally occurring that all a
person with a shotgun would have to do was shoot upwards and half a dozen would fall out of the
sky like it was raining cheeseburgers. So, that is what colonists did, with absolute abandon, and by
about 1900, the last known passenger pigeon was shot in the wild.
Now, the last living passenger pigeon died in a Cincinnati zoo in the year 1914. Her name indeed
was Martha and she lived, it’s estimated, into her late twenties. The day that she was found dead on
the floor of her cage, the zoo put her in a 300-pound block of ice and shipped her straight from
Cincinnati to the Smithsonian in Washington DC, where she has been dead ever since.
I looked for news reports of her death since she had been a bird celebrity in her day, and in
googling “Martha pigeon obituary,” I landed on a Legacy.com page for the recently deceased
woman, Martha F. Pigeon, who passed away in the summer of 2022. Martha Frick Pigeon, 86, was a
preschool teacher and then she taught high school algebra. She loved to play bridge, she had such a
sweet, warm smile. And then I looked, her memorial service was held on July 8, 2022, the very
same day that my dad died. So, both Martha pigeons, rest in peace. You too, Pops. Not to make
anyone sad, I think it’s beautiful. But what about say, an encore from the world’s most celebrated
pigeon?
Alie: Valerie Bertha, Kaffeine, Carissa Quisenberry, Fybreglass, Sarah Railey King, Helios, and Patricia
Evans all want to know about the resurrection of the passenger pigeon. Should they be de-extinct?
Is that even possible? Is it in the works?
Rosemary: Oh gosh, since so many people want to know, I can't speak on that. I was focusing on Columba livia,
so I don’t really know. It doesn’t sound like a great idea to me, any sort of de-extinction.
Aside: Okay, so this organization is called the Revive and Restore Project and I went on their
website and found a passage titled, “HOW TO MAKE A PASSENGER PIGEON,” which gave this
recipe for “the five stages of de-extinction are:”
1. Comparing the genomes of the Passenger Pigeon and [the existing] Band-tailed Pigeon
2. Identifying regions of the living Band-tailed Pigeons' genome to edit
3. Editing the germline [or sex cells] of living Band-tailed Pigeons
4. Breeding a new generation of Passenger Pigeons in captivity
5. Reintroducing Passenger Pigeons to the wild through proper conditioning and monitoring.
So yes, it involves taking the germ line cells of existing pigeons and popping in some code for
passenger pigeon sex cells. 
13
Last year, I visited the World Center for Birds of Prey, and I was invited into the collections where
they slowly pulled out a drawer to reveal a prized tawny-colored, taxidermied passenger pigeon. I
was going to say, "In the flesh,” but it’s just pretty much the feathers stuffed with cotton. The
moment of seeing it, it had the same energy as if you were 12, and you and your friend snuck into
their older brother’s room and they showed you a bong that they were hiding in their closet, like,
“Isn’t this intense? Can you believe we are seeing this?” Part “Whoa, that is wild,” and part, "Oh,
should I be concerned for the future?” But many people wanted to know about pigeons wearing
things.
Alie: When it comes to fashion, Jessi, Steve K, Adam Foote, and Nick want to know about their apparel.
Jessi said: I saw at a zoo in Hamburg that homing pigeons sometimes wore whistles. Steve K and
Adam Foote want to know, Steve K’s daughter Charlie who loves pigeons wants to know: What
ever happened to the pigeons with cowboy hats in Las Vegas? Are they okay? Can you enlighten
me?
Rosemary: Oh, I don’t know because that happened after my book came out. I don’t know what happened to
those pigeons. I’m hoping somebody captured them and removed the cowboy hats from the
pigeons. But please don’t do that.
Aside: So yes, at least three pigeons, dubbed by locals Cluck Norris, Coolamity Jane, and Billy the
Pidge were bobbing about behatted. No one ever found the culprit. So, please never ever superglue
tiny hats onto animals. I can't believe anyone even has to tell anyone this. However, we do have an
episode about sea urchins, and they do enjoy wearing small 3D-printed hats in case you’d like to
consume some tales of consensual animal hats, we’ll link that episode in the show notes.
But on the topic of helping pigeons, a donation for this week will go to Great Lakes Pigeon Rescue
on behalf of Rosemary and in memory of her father, pigeon friend, Vincent Mosco. You can learn
more about Great Lakes Pigeon Rescue at the link in the show notes. That donation was made
possible by sponsors of the show.
[Ad Break]
Okay, where were we? Yes, sticky situations.
Rosemary: Don’t glue things to pigeons, it’s not a good idea. But there are some times when it's okay for
pigeons to wear clothes. And I love the example of whistles. So, pigeon whistles are especially a big
tradition in places in Asia, places like China and Indonesia. Pigeons will be flown around in these
big flocks wearing these elaborate and very, very light (because they have to be very light and easy
to fly with) whistles that are made of bamboo and various other really light materials. If you've
never heard this, I recommend you do a search because these pigeons flying overhead will make
this kind of like, [hum of whistles fades in and out] ghostly, ethereal whistling noise. It’s really very
beautiful and it’s this gorgeous tradition. They don’t do it to wild pigeons, people will do it to their
own pet pigeons. So, whistles are a thing that pigeons will wear.
Also, if you have pet pigeons, one way to keep them from pooping all over your house is to put on
pigeon pants on your pigeons.
Alie: [squeals] No.
Rosemary: So, pigeon pants are these amazing little vests with kind of like a butt pocket, like a cloaca pocket,
and they come in all kinds of styles. You can get Superman pigeon pants and Spiderman pigeon
pants and, and little maid pigeon pants. You can get jorts and you can get anything you want for
your pigeons. [Alie gasps, Rosemary giggles] Rhinestones... It's a delight. And the pigeon poops into 
14
the pants and then you clean the pants. And yeah, I remember going to one website that sells these
and they had this FAQ and they said they had this question, you know, “Do the pigeons enjoy
wearing the pants?” And the reply was something like, “They get used to it.” [both laugh]
Aside: We don’t always like wearing pants, but we do what we have to do. And before we started
recording, as we were logging on and doing mic checks, Rosemary mentioned her own pet bird, not
a pigeon, but still a bird.
Alie: Do people have those for like, parrots and parakeets and cockatiels and stuff?
Rosemary: Yeah, those can exist, but pigeons are a little less trainable than some parrots. So, I think really,
they’re super popular with pigeon owners.
Alie: As a bird owner, do your birds kind of know where to go and where not to go?
Rosemary: Yeah. And they will try to get around that at every available opportunity. [Alie laughs] So, parrots
are interesting because they are not domesticated. Parrots were just sort of stolen from the wild
and now they live with us. My parrots know they're not supposed to poop on me and so, they will
do what I call a stealth poop where they'll try to, like, sneak it without me knowing, or they'll fly to
a place and they'll poop and they'll come back. So, sort of whatever mood they're in. But pigeons, I
know people who are trying to train their pigeons to poop in the potty and some pigeons seem to
take to it and some of them do not, at all. And that's when you get the pants.
Alie: I love a pant. Well, last listener question. It's unfortunate that they don't have shoes because in
first-time question-asker Natalie Quinones’s words: Is it true that pigeons sometimes lose their
toes because they get tangled in human hair from the streets? Kira Simon Kennedy, first-time
question-asker, said: One of my professors did research on why pigeons in Paris have messed up
toes and it turns out it's due to human hair!
Aside: Kira Simon-Kennedy, first-time question-asker, included with her question a mention of
the 2019 paper, "Urban pigeons losing toes due to human activities.” And other patrons including
Lee Lawlor, Lisa Nijhuis, Fybreglass, KittyKat81, Cassandra Rodrigues, Juliet Petrencs, Ayshia
Yaeger, and AB had pigeon foot questions. Laura Kelliher, first-time question-asker, and Jenn
Macgillivray wanted to know: Why do they have stumpy feet? Hannah asked about their nub feet
and...
Alie: Naomi Jane wants to know: Should I feel awful that my long hair molts so much? A ton of others
want to know about string foot. Can you tell me about it?
Rosemary: Yeah! So, I don’t think you should feel bad about having long hair, I really don't. I think that you
shouldn't collect a ton of your hair and put it in a big pile where pigeons are going to be walking
around. But pigeon feet get damaged for a whole bunch of different reasons.
Really what's going on is that pigeons walk when they forage. So, you look at, like, a little sparrow
and they hop, they hop around, and they perch on twigs and stuff. Pigeons aren't really perchers,
they're really, they walk, and they forage, and they walk around. And so, whatever we have on the
ground, whether it's bits of string or, you know, bits of trash, or sharp things, they will just kind of
walk and they'll injure their feet for all sorts of different reasons. They'll get them tangled up too in
different strings and different hairs.
So, if you see a pigeon that's in trouble like that, there are Facebook communities called String Foot
Saviors and various other things like that and there are communities where people will trap their
local pigeons and then figure out sanitary ways to remove the string and keep the pigeons’ feet,
you know, healthy during that process. I've personally rescued pigeons that have wrapped up feet
and taken them to rehabbers, but I have not gone around and captured pigeons and trimmed the 
15
strings from their feet. So, I can't guarantee that that's going to work. But I think you should check
out those Facebook groups.
You know, this is one of the things, it's like, we all get so frustrated with humanity in general, but I
really believe that most people are pretty good. The fact that there are people out there who care
enough about pigeons, that they will catch them, endure the social stigma of standing there
[giggles] with tiny scissors and a little pigeon and some antiseptic, you know, and help this little
bird, just makes me feel so much better about the world.
Alie: [little sigh] There is a TikTok going around about... It looks so evil because there’s this woman who
is throwing birdseed and then all of a sudden, she swoops in like a hawk and grabs a pigeon and
you’re like, "What is this bitch doing?!” And then it turns out she’s just got her eye on the ones that
have string foot and she’s grabbing them, calming them down, and then de-string footing them. So...
hero. A pigeon hero.
Rosemary: Yeah, that is so wonderful, and also, I hope she’s not teaching people to catch pigeons and then...
[laughs] Take one or two.
Alie: I know. Tell me about it. Take part in the Facebook group, be apprenticed before you do it.
Aside: So, let’s hand it to the feet-seeking volunteers out there who deserve their own
documentary, I would watch that. Speaking of media, how have these ubiqui-birds flittered their
way into our eyes and ears and hearts asked patrons Deli Dames, TheDorkNextDoor, Dani C, Dave
Cannon, Scott Hanley, Abraham Livingston, and first-time question-asker Andrea Marie Squirrel
Tree Roggero, who had questions about a wide variety of songs, dances, and pigeon movies
including, Maggie Morgan and Katy who asked: What is the ologist’s opinion on Bert’s “Doing the
Pigeon” song and dance? Is it a good Sesame Street bit or the best Sesame Street bit? [“I love pigeons
and I love how they walk, and I’ve created a really cool dance called doin’ the pigeon.”] I’ll answer
that, it’s the best. But overall...
Alie: Any movies that you think don’t do pigeons dirty?
Rosemary: Oh gosh. So, there is a pigeon movie database. It's like the PMDB. And sadly, like right after my
book was published, the person stopped updating it so, if you're out there, please update it. Where
they went through and they talked about whether, you know, every single movie that has pigeons
in it is doing the pigeons, you know, dirty or doing the pigeons nicely.
I think my favorite is Home Alone 2. [“Merry Christmas!”] Granted it’s been a long time since I’ve
seen it but there’s a pigeon lady in Home Alone 2 and she has all of her pigeons.
[Clip from Home Alone 2]
Pigeon lady: People pass me in the street, they see me, but they try to ignore me. They prefer
I wasn’t a part of their city.
Kevin: Yeah, it’s sort of like that with my family, I’m kind of the pigeon of the house, just
because I’m the youngest.
And at first, you're sort of scared of the pigeon lady, but then you realize that actually she just loves
pigeons and she's this good person and you know, she's got a lot of big feelings. And I think that's
true of all of us, weirdos, myself included, who enjoy pigeons. You know, people are good and care
about pigeons and have big hearts. So, I definitely like that one.
Alie: And those pigeons were trained actors, right? From what I saw in your book.
16
Rosemary: They were, yeah! There were hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of pigeons that were trained
for that. They were all domesticated pigeons. What’s really sweet is that they were rotated out of
scenes so that they wouldn’t get too tired being in Home Alone 2.
Alie: And they just knew where to hit their mark and then when to fly off?
Rosemary: I don’t know how much food was involved, [laughs] how much training was involved there. But
pigeons can be trained to do some pretty cool stuff. B.F. Skinner taught them to play ping-pong, so
you could probably train them to do a little bit of acting. Where’s the Pigeon Oscars? That’s what I
want to know. Pigeons walking the red carpet.
Alie: This is a good question. [laughs]
Rosemary: Yeah!
Alie: All they gotta do is just put a trail of bagel and that’s how you walk the red carpet.
Rosemary: [slow gasp] Yes!
Aside: Strutting the red carpet, chest out, beak first, because pigeons deserve our respect and our
adulation for going barefoot in New York, for delivering messages long before DMs, for their
natural iridescence and for not actually giving any city dwellers meningitis in the 1960s. So, if you
are a friend to pigeons, and you help them, you’re a friend to Rosemary.
Rosemary: You know, thank you for rescuing pigeons, people. And consider adopting a pet pigeon!
Alie: I’m thinking about it now. I mean, the pants alone I’m like... Exciting!
Rosemary: There are so many styles, and you can get pants for every holiday. [Alie laughs] Halloween,
Christmas, little Santa outfits, it’s gold. Hanukkah pigeons.
Alie: I’m going to be googling the pigeon shit out of that, that’s so exciting. [Rosemary laughs]
And I know I always ask you know, the tough thing about what you do, or is there anything that is
not your favorite about pigeons or is there anything that was difficult in writing the book that was
just... that really got ya?
Rosemary: I think it’s always hard to write books about animals and not get sad about some of the things that
we've done to animals and some of the things that we've done to people. So, you know, hitting
those points of injustice were really hard and it was hard to kind of figure out how to talk about
those in a book that was supposed to be kind of funny and goofy and full of cartoons. That and the
isolation of writing a book or doing this kind of media are really challenging. So, I always like, you
know, hint, hint, if anyone wants to send me emails and say, “Hey, I read your things,” because I
just sort of put stuff out into the void and then, you know, I go and read a book very quietly. So, that
can be challenging too.
Alie: And people can find you on social media and find your email, right?
Rosemary: Yeah, yeah, yeah. I’m around.
Alie: You’re more adored than you realize, I’ll tell you that straight off the bat. What about your favorite
thing about pigeons?
Rosemary: [sighs] I think it’s the milk. [“Oh, wow. Okay, great.”] [Alie laughs] It's hard. It's hard to not be
obsessed with the milk. I mean, they're making milk! It's just shocking. And I remember rescuing a
really young pigeon at one point, and there was no nest, and it was kind of like in the middle of
nowhere. And I remember calling the wildlife rehabber and they said, “You have to bring it in
because we have to make formula for this pigeon because it needs milk.” Which is just amazing. I 
17
mean, I kind of want to see, like, a mug of this stuff. [both laugh] Like, how is this? How did they
make milk? It's just so delightful. Convergent evolution is just incredible, you know? How did we
stumble on milk, and they stumbled on milk and here we are just like nursing our babies in two
vastly different locations in ways. It's just fascinating.
Alie: But all in the same city.
Rosemary: Yeah, yeah. absolutely. Yeah. That and I think you know, knowing that Tesla and Darwin and a
bunch of famous people were head over heels in love with pigeons also, really made me really
delighted.
Alie: Tesla in particular, who described his love of a pigeon, almost like the love of a woman. It was his
reason for being from what I remember, right?
Rosemary: Yeah! He said, “I love that pigeon. I loved her as a man loves a woman.” Yeah, he fell in love with
one particular pigeon. And I also just learned recently that he passed away in an accident while he
was on his way to feed his local feral pigeons. So, he was very pigeon-obsessed. He was all about
pigeons.
Alie: [softly] Wow.
Rosemary: Yeah. So, where are the billionaires who are putting all of their money into Tesla-based
corporations designed to help pigeons? That's what I want to know.
Alie: [laughs] This is the call to action we’ve been waiting for. A hundred percent. [Rosemary laughs] You
got money? Put it in pigeons. Maybe betting. Maybe just an investment in their well-being.
Aside: and if you would like to invest in a book, Rosemary has many, including Flowers Are
Pretty...Weird!, Butterflies are Pretty…Gross!, Birding Is My Favorite Video Game: Cartoons about the
Natural World from Bird and Moon, and Expedition Backyard, of course, the now-classic, A Pocket
Guide to Pigeon Watching: Getting to Know the World's Most Misunderstood Bird, and the upcoming:
There Are No Ants in this Book.
Rosemary: Yeah, I have two picture books coming out. One I can talk about is called There Are No Ants in this
Book that comes out this summer and is about spoiler alert, there are ants, it's a kid's picture book.
[Alie laughs] And then I have another book for adults. I will caution people. Although my pigeon
book has cartoons, it is for adults and has some very elaborate descriptions of pigeon marital
activities. [Alie laughs] I've had a few people say, “Oh, it's got cartoons. I'm buying it for my 6-yearold.” And I'm like, “No, no, no! But buy it for yourself and you'll be amused.” But yeah, I'm the only
Rosemary Mosco in the world, so if you google me, you'll get me, for good and for bad.
Alie: I’m so happy I got a chance to talk to you. Getting to sit and talk to you about pigeons anywhere in
the world, in any form is a privilege. So, thank you for doing this.
Rosemary: Well thank you. All these listener questions were amazing and talking to you was such a delight. So
yeah, you made my whole day, you and the pigeons I saw this morning. [Alie laughs] I’m all set.
----------
So, ask pigeon people pertinent questions because look at that, they are eager to talk and change
your mind. So, I hope you stop to look at a pigeon and say, “Hey buddy, I see you and I like you even
more now.” Of course, pick up any of Rosemary’s books, and you can find her site linked in the show
notes. She’s on social media at her name, @RosemaryMosco. A donation went to the Great Lakes
Pigeon Rescue in memory of her late, wonderful dad and pigeon appreciator, Vincent Mosco. Think
of him when you see a pigeon and send a little cosmic hug to Rosemary as she grieves that loss. I’ve
been there, it’s tough. Rosemary, we adore you and we adore pigeons.
18
We are @Ologies on Twitter or X and on Instagram, where we re-post your Ologies art every Friday
and your merch photos on Monday. Ologies Merch is available at OlogiesMerch.com and we have
some new designs like an “Ask _____ People _____ Questions” you can fill in with a Sharpie however
you like or leave it as is. We have a field guide shirt that I love and bathing suits, we have them all at
OlogiesMerch.com. Erin Talbert admins the Ologies Podcast Facebook group, Aveline Malek and The
Wordary make our professional transcripts, Kelly R Dwyer works on the website, and Noel
Dilworth is our scheduling producer. Susan Hale is our grand puppeteer and managing director,
Jake Chaffee is our assistant editor, and dusting up my crumbs into a whole bagel is lead editor
Mercedes Maitland of Maitland Audio.
And if you stick around until the end of the episode, I tell you a secret and this week it’s that I forgot
to say Nick Thorburn wrote the theme music, which he did. I also forgot to tell you about Smologies,
which are shorter, kid-friendly episodes that we have, you can find them at
AlieWard.com/Smologies or linked in the show notes... Very fun announcement coming soon about
that, some changes we’re making on May 16th.
Anyway, the secret, the secret is it is 5:56 in the morning, Pacific time, and I’m supposed to leave in
four minutes for the airport, [chuckles] going to be maybe five. But I’m going to Mexico City today
and I’ll be there for a few days. I have a friend, my friend Kathryn Burns is a choreographer, she’s
teaching down there. We keep saying we’re going to take a trip together so I’m going to go down
there, we’re going to go to some museums. Field trip episodes coming soon, including one on
axolotls, whaaaat? So, I’m going to go do some science reporting there which you’ll get to hear in
upcoming episodes. But yeah, I’m supposed to leave in a few minutes. [fake laugh] It’s going to be
fine. I also slept 13 hours last night, so I feel like I’m overall, doing okay.
This wasn’t the best secret and I’m sorry about that, but another secret is the best pair of tweezers I
ever found, I found on the floor on a film shoot I was doing, that had dropped behind, like, a dresser,
so it was obvious someone forgot them. I found them, I realized, 10 years ago. I’ve gotten other
tweezers, they’re not as good. I still use this pair of tweezers I found on the floor. I washed them but
they work better than anyone. Are they magic? Nobody knows. Okay, bye! I’m going to go to the
airport. See ya!
