Oh hey, it’s your friend’s dog with the snaggletooth, Alie Ward. We’re going to take a deep breath, all
right? ... We got this. We got it. Let’s get illuminated on the topic of black holes, shall we?
So, this ologist is a Theoretical Astrophysicist and a Cosmic Origins Scientist in the Astrophysics
Science Division at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. He got his bachelor’s in
physics, a master's in Condensed Matter Physics, and that deals with how matter arises, and then he
just topped off those degrees with a casual PhD in Theoretical Astrophysics at North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University.
So, we were introduced by Ologies fan-favorite guest, you love her, Dr. Raven the Science Maven
Baxter, and I trust her taste in everything. So, I asked this NASA scientist to please meet me the next
time he was in LA and to be prepared and steel himself for questions that a 6-year-old might ask
about what is a black hole. He obliged and explained things so well, we’re all going to learn enough
to impress at least an 8-year-old, but also people who work in our office who are going to think that
we’re geniuses. So, he showed up, he was wearing the coolest boots I have ever seen – they were
dressy, above the ankle with, like, embroidered gold floral motifs – and we headed to my home
studio with two cups of tea and a small goblin named my dog.
But before we get into it, thank you so much to everyone at Patreon.com/Ologies who submitted
questions about wormholes and dimensions and the singularity and so many terms we’re going to
talk about. You too can be a patron and submit questions for me to read, alongside your name.
Thank you to everyone wearing our art on your bodies at OlogiesMerch.com. And of course, you can
support the show and get it in more ears just by rating and leaving us a review. I read them every
week, such as this hot one from Thvchhfdvbjfdvg, who, I think that was just fingers dancing on a
keyboard, but they said:
Hit and run? More like hit and FUN! Yesterday, I was rear-ended while driving home from
work and listening to Ologies. As I waited for 4 hours for an officer to make a police report on
the side of a busy highway, Alie and her guests guided me through amazing topics and helped
me calm down with fun and learning. I was even able to laugh during what was a stressful
situation.
Oh, Thvchhfdvbjfdvg, that sucks. That sucks so bad. Not for me though, because that was a nice
review.
Okay. So, the ology for this one is Black Hole Theory Cosmology and it’s a lot of words but it’s heavy
stuff, because a black hole, it’s a spot in the universe where gravity and space and time go hog wild,
things go bonkers, and it’s so strong that nothing can wrestle out from it, not even light, or you. So,
where are they? What are they? What's in the center of them? I don’t know but this guest does and
is going to fill us in.
So, get ready for a dazzling two-parter that starts with the 101 of black holes, absolute basics,
busting of flim-flam, the major players in the history of the theories, what happens when they
collide, how do we image them, what is the most giant, dense book you can buy about them, where
do trad goths fit into this episode, does my dog exist, how many of me are there, the hows and how 
2
manys of black holes, how astrophysics is like drawing, and the greatest gift he could give his mom
with Theoretical Astrophysicist and Black Hole Theory Cosmologist, Dr. Ronald Gamble.
----------
Dr. Gamble: Ron Gamble, he/him/his.
Alie: All right, let’s get into it.
Dr. Gamble: My work is entirely focused on the theory of black holes. So, a lot of people work on just observing
them and they're really looking at the matter around a black hole. I'm like, no. What is a black hole?
How can we move or how can we get to one? Maybe. What's the theory around it? What's the
math? Can I make new math to study a black hole? Do I need new math? Do I need to break my
brain to study this?
Of course, you mentioned cosmology and that's a more, kind of, larger scale, like an esoteric
almost, what's our place in the universe? Where did the universe come from? How many black
holes are there? Was there a black hole at the beginning of the universe? Is there going to be a
black hole at the end of the universe? Who knows? But nobody panic because that's a very long,
long way away. [laughs]
Alie: [laughs] What about, is there one in... the middle of most solar systems? Let’s pull back. Where
exactly are we and what’s in the center of the galaxy, our galaxy?
Dr. Gamble: So, if you look at the map of if you look at the map of a Milky Way, right – the Milky Way is a spiral
galaxy – if you look at the arms of the spiral galaxy and you go kind of two-thirds, a little, maybe a
third out, that's where we are. That's where the Solar System is. So, we're in, like, a very sweet spot
in the galaxy. Earth is in a sweet spot in the Solar System. We are like, perfectly placed.
Aside: And just in case you’re blanking, as far as we know, there’s one universe. In that universe
are up to 2 trillion galaxies and the Milky Way is just one of those 2 trillion. In the Milky Way, there
are about 100 billion stars including our one little Sun, around which your planet revolves. So,
we’re up here, we’re worried about things like nose hairs and how many likes our baby
announcement got while living a very short life on a tiny speck, on a pinwheel arm, of a spiral
galaxy, our ol’ Milky Way.
Dr. Gamble: But at the center of the galaxy is a supermassive black hole. So, supermassive, meaning it's at least
a billion times the mass of our Sun.
Alie: Oh my God.
Dr. Gamble: So, if you think a billion Suns, that is the mass of that black hole, and it's called Sagittarius A*, so
now we named it, that's at the center of our galaxy. We’ve been studying it for a long, long time. Do
we know any more than a few numbers? No. [laughs] We still need theory about it. But it's a very
interesting object to think, you know, over a million billion years we're going to fall into a black
hole.
Alie: Is it sucking things in as it goes? Is that why it’s a spiral? Is it like a toilet going down?
Dr. Gamble: It depends on how the galaxy evolved. So, you have many different types of galaxies, and I don’t
want to go into the galaxy-ology here [both laugh] but you have spiral galaxies you have elliptical
galaxies, you have globular galaxies that are kind of irregular and that is just how the stars, planets,
rocks, dust accrued around the central object that’s pulling them all in due to gravity. Could be a
black hole, could be a larger or smaller galaxy at the center. Sometimes it is, most of the time it’s a
black hole because that’s the only thing strong enough that can actually pull and hold a galaxy 
3
together. And then, you have dark matter that’s kind of squeezing everything in and holding a lot of
things in place.
Aside: And for more on specifically dark matter, you can see our Scotohylology episode with Dr.
Flip Tanedo to learn more about how it’s everywhere, but we can't see it, we don’t know what it
does, maybe you’re a ghost. We talk about that.
Dr. Gamble: So, do we know the connection between dark matter, dark energy, and black holes? Not yet. Come
back and I’ll tell you in 15 years... 20, 50 years. I don’t know.
Aside: Just a quick question, what is gravity? Where is it coming from? [“Good question.”]
Dr. Gamble: So, if I have flat spacetime, okay, we are talking about curvature now. So, now we’re talking about
spacetime curvature, that is the strength of gravity, right? So, gravity in and of itself, is the
curvature of spacetime. It is a force, it’s one of the four fundamental forces: electromagnetism, the
strong and weak nuclear force, and then there’s gravity. Gravity is always the one that eludes us
because we still don’t know how it behaves entirely. But we’re going back to this flat sheet. If
there’s no gravity, spacetime is flat. As soon as I place anything with mass or energy, spacetime
curves, and that creates gravity.
Aside: So, mass is mass, but gravity is spacetime bending to that mass. And we’ll talk about
spacetime in a bit but imagine a wire frame or a grid and it’s stretching and warping around mass
and energy.
Alie: Aha!
Dr. Gamble: Now, how can I curve spacetime? Do I just need a static object just sitting there? Yeah, it’ll sit there,
or it could spin.
Alie: What happens if it spins?
Dr. Gamble: Well, you’re creating more gravity?
Alie: Why is the spinning creating more gravity?
Dr. Gamble: Because you’re curving spacetime.
Alie: Oh! Because it’s spinning so it’s deforming spacetime a little bit more.
Dr. Gamble: Not only that, but if I spin faster, I’m getting more energy so I’m curving spacetime more, so I have
more gravity. Again, how else can you curve something? Are donuts curved? Yeah, but they have a
hole in the center. So, if I have something that’s at the very center and it’s like a ball, a black hole,
and it’s curving spacetime, we have gravity. But what if I also have something that’s on the edge
but it’s more shaped like a donut or a disc with a hole in the center? We call that an annulus, but
okay... [“Donuts anyone?”]
Aside: Just a side note, when you see an eclipse and there’s a glowing ring, like a halo, from the
Sun around the silhouette of the Moon, that’s also called an annulus. And annulus comes from the
root word for ring. And um, yeah... an annulus is related to the other hole that sounds like it that
you’re thinking about.
Dr. Gamble: Disc hole, [laughs] for now, and that has mass energy and it’s rotating. Does that create gravity?
Yeah. Now, if I keep going further and further out, observations tell me that hey, there’s this extra
mass that’s sitting on the edge of galaxies. What the hell is that? Dark matter. Is dark matter
creating gravity? Yes.
Alie: A lot of it? Or a little of it? Or all of it?
4
Dr. Gamble: Enough to keep... It creates enough of an effect or enough force to keep the galaxy spinning faster
than it should at the edge. Now, does dark matter have gravity? Yeah. It only interacts with gravity
and nothing else, that’s why we can't see it. Are dark matter and dark energy and black holes made
of the same thing? I have no idea. [Alie groans] Cliffhanger.
Alie: Interesting. [Dr. Gamble laughs] Oh my gosh... Love a cliffhanger. Okay so, do you think black holes
then... Is one of the theories that black holes predated galaxies because they just started sucking in
matter and that’s kind of what made the galaxy gather there? That’s kind of what’s going on?
Dr. Gamble: Yeah. So, the term there, and I’m going to try and keep it super basic, is accreting matter. So, we’re
talking about accreting matter. We’re talking about the black hole pulling things in and at the same
time, if you pull something in and you’re self-gravitating, you have a likelihood to rotate. So, you’re
not only pulling things in but you’re also rotating around. So, it kind of creates that spiral look, that
spiral geometry. But if you do it over millions and billions of years, then you’re going to get more
matter, more stars, planets. There are smaller nebulae, there are smaller systems inside the discs
of galaxies.
Aside: A nebula is this huge blob of dust and gasses and part of your body, and your brain might
be made up from stars that were made in a nebula. And no, I can't really handle that. But yeah, a
black hole accretes and draws in all kinds of things like planets, and stars, and nebulae, and your
car keys, and my sandwich.
Dr. Gamble: So, you can imagine... Like stellar mass black holes, which are black holes the size of our Sun, in the
disc around a supermassive black hole, and there could be a thousand of them there.
Alie: [softly] Really?
Dr. Gamble: Because they're the size of stars. How many stars are in the Milky Way? [“Couple of hundred
billion.”] So, you can imagine, well, there's probably some black holes there, falling into another
black hole, falling into another black hole that's a much larger black hole.
Aside: So, a supermassive black hole at the center of our galaxy but then sprinkled in there, a
bunch of Sun-sized black holes, just dark voids that light and matter can't get out of. And I had a
difficult time processing this and I think I may have dissociated for a moment.
Dr. Gamble: So, now it’s like... yeah, your face. Like what the hell? [laughs]
Alie: Yeah, whaaat? Can black holes be tiny and in our Solar System? Is there a possibility that there’s
little pinpoints of black holes here and there around us? Or are black holes only gigantic?
Dr. Gamble: Short answer, and I have to say this is... No. Long answer is yes.
Alie: Okay.
Dr. Gamble: But we call them primordial black holes. So, those are black holes that are not like your traditional
black hole, like, traditional meaning the center of the galaxy, that’s our run-of-the-mill black hole.
These are more geared toward much longer timescales. We’re talking about cosmology, we’re
talking about cosmological times, we’re talking going back near the Big Bang, and what did those
black holes look like? And those are on the scales, those are tiny black holes. So, we’re talking
probably on the masses of like... maybe atoms, molecules, maybe up to the size of a planet. We’re
talking about micro black holes.
The mass of a black hole does not matter, the physics of the black hole is the same. Whether you
have a supermassive black hole or a micro, tiny, primordial black hole, the black hole physics are
the same, as we found out. Theory says that and theory has been correct so far. There are some
holes... [Alie laughs] I’m working on it, but it’s been pretty good so far. Thus far, it’s been pretty 
5
good. [“Prettyyyy, pretty good.”] There’s not a black hole that could just randomly pop up, guys,
don’t worry. There’s not going to be one in Manhattan, you’re going to see it in a movie only in
movies.
Alie: [laughs] You’re like, [dramatic voice] “Dr. Gamble had a bad day,” a black hole opens up in a
subway, coming to a theater near you. [Dr. Gamble laughs]
Okay, so we’re going to talk about the structure of them, but I want to ask you about you. How does
one go from a normal person who doesn’t know shit about this to someone who is a theoretical
astrophysicist studying the nature of black holes? Yeah, how did it happen?
Dr. Gamble: So first, you have to be 4 years old with a Solar System placemat in front of you. Pluto was a planet
in 1995. [Alie laughs] Fuck that. And then you ask your mom, “Does the Sun have fire?” And that's
where my story begins. [laughs]
Alie: Really?!
Dr. Gamble: At 4 years old and she was like, “Oh crap. Okay. I need to put him in something.” Because she has a
degree in biology, she was like, “Okay, I don't do space.” [both laugh] So, she did that. So, all along
through childhood, through college, high school, whatever, I would just ask myself, “Well, what if?
Gravity's weird, but what does gravity actually do? What do black holes do? What's inside of a
black hole?” So, I googled, I looked up what are the unanswered questions in physics, what do we
not know yet? Dark matter was, like, at the top of the list. Dark energy. There's another weird thing
that I'm probably not going to mention because it's going to take us another hour, segue.
Alie: [small, squeaky voice] What is it? What is it?
Dr. Gamble: It’s called dark flow but I’m not going to even...
Alie: Oh my god, I’ve never even heard of it.
Dr. Gamble: It’s a bunch of weird stuff.
Aside: It’s a controversial hypothesis apparently, so we’re just going to set that aside. But if you
happen to Wikipedia it, don’t get distracted by this italicized warning on the top of the page that
says, "Not to be confused with dark energy, dark fluid, dark matter, or dark wave.” And I was like,
“Hm?” And I clicked the dark wave link, and it takes you to a page about the 1990s goth scene,
which then took me to an external website where I learned that I would be considered an “elder
trad goth.” So, where were we? We were spiraling.
Dr. Gamble: And then of course, some other things that pertain to black holes and the Big Bang and others. I'm
like, okay. So, and I looked up, “Well, why haven't we figured this out?” Oh, well we don't know yet.
“Why can't I do this?”
So, fast forward to college, undergrad, I'm asking my advisor, like, okay, I want to study black holes.
He’s like, "Um, we don't have anybody here that does that.” I'm like, okay, “Well, how do I do this?
Math.” And I look up... I open [chuckles], what we call “The Gravity Bible,” which is Misner, Thorne,
and Wheeler, Gravity. [“That’s heavy, man.”] Thank you, MTW for all the headache you’ve given me.
[both laugh]
Aside: So, Gravitation, it’s a 1,280-page high-level textbook. And yes, it is a religious text to
astrophysicists. It was initially published, first came out in 1973 and the reviews for it still swoon
saying things like “a pedagogic masterpiece.” If there were a Rotten Tomatoes for physics books,
this would be Certified Fresh. It was co-written by Charles Misner, Kip Thorne, and John Wheeler
and Kip was a co-winner of the Nobel Prize for Physics. This book covers such topics as the Theory
of Relativity, flat and curved spacetime, and black holes, gravitational collapse, gravitational waves, 
6
cosmology, and so much more; like an infomercial for a manual of the universe. It’s got this stark
black cover with a white diagram of an apple, some sans serif font, and kind of a rebellious sense of
Nixon-era futurism. And honestly, I saw it and I was like, this would be the perfect graphic for a
dark wave album.
So, if you are ever set up on a date, let’s say, someone sets you up on a date with an astrophysicist,
and should want to marry them on that first date, just ask if they still have their copy of Gravitation
lying around.
Dr. Gamble: And I look, I’m like, “Oh shit, there’s a lot of math here,” that I didn’t know at the time. [Alie laughs]
I’m like, what does this mean? What the hell is a metric tensor and all this? I’m like, “Okay, let me
flip,” and I go through the glossary and am like, “That’s a lot of terms.” And at the time, I had not
taken Calculus III yet. So, I’m like, let me go back to my actual homework that’s due tomorrow,
finish this, then go back on, like, weekends or my own time and start taking notes. I started just
rewriting things I saw in textbooks. I didn’t know what they said, I didn’t know what they meant
but I knew I had to practice memorizing some of this so that when I actually went back and I
learned the math now, became an expert in the math I was like, “Okay, I’ve seen this before, I’ve
seen it a while now.”
Aside: So, without knowing the full context, yeah, Dr. Gamble got familiar with the shapes of the
equations and the patterns so that later, the figures were familiar, and he could jump into the hows
and the whys of that what.
Dr. Gamble: I can now really explode my brain, right, and be like, okay well, let me come back to my art
background, I’m a painter also. [Alie exclaims] So, I double-majored in art and physics in
undergrad.
Alie: I did not know that! [gasps]
Dr. Gamble: Yes. Superpowers.
Alie: Did you make a lot of space painting?
Dr. Gamble: Honestly, I didn’t actually. [laughs]
Alie: You’re like, “This is a different part of my life.”
Dr. Gamble: I did a lot of seascapes because I like the beach. So, that was one of my favorite things, I did a lot of
portraits. But, ha-ha, you heard it here first, I am going to be doing a cubism black hole series in
2024.
Alie: Are you really?
Dr. Gamble: Yeah, I’ll show you.
Aside: So, we will link Dr. Gamble’s social media in the show notes in case you’d like to own a
painting by someone whose brain comprehends beautifully terrifying things in the universe.
Dr. Gamble: That’s the story of how I kind of... You’ve got to get interested in it, but you have to be really
intimate with the theory, with the actual philosophy of black holes. What does a black hole mean?
That’s what I asked. So, I was like, “Let me learn everything I can while college is cheap in
undergrad. [both laugh] I can just take an extra class because I have a scholarship here and just
learn and ask questions.” That’s what I really did, I asked a lot of questions both to my professors,
to myself, and then others who actually studied black holes. And then I just went and did it, I found
the textbooks. Some of the math, I knew I had to learn a lot of math. So, I started my graduate
thesis, my dissertation, two years before I got into grad school.
7
Alie: Oh wow!
Dr. Gamble: So, it was the summer before my junior year in undergrad, that’s when I first started learning the
math that I knew I would need for my PhD. So, it was kind of like a foresight.
Alie: And what was your PhD? What was the dissertation name?
Dr. Gamble: Oh my god. [laughs] Okay, so here are the words that I can't really ignore. My dissertation was on a
nonlinear gravitational wave theory for rotating black holes with a positive cosmological
constant...
Alie: Okay.
Dr. Gamble: ... under a viscoelastic interpretation.
Alie: Okay.
Aside: Once again that was, "On Gravitational Radiation: Nonlinear Wave Theory in Viscoelastic
Kerr-Lambda Spacetime.” Yep.
Dr. Gamble: So, what that means is, I quite literally created [chuckles] an extension to Einstein’s theory of
relativity that now interpreted spacetime as some elastic property.
Alie: Viscoelastic.
Dr. Gamble: Viscoelastic. So, if you think of elastic putty, that’s how I envisioned spacetime to act around a
rotating black hole, radiating gravitational waves away. So, I’m thinking, “Okay, this is weird, yes.
But I know the math to put this together.” So, the math literally, I was working with Legos at that
point in grad school.
Alie: Literal Legos? Actual Legos?
Dr. Gamble: Sometimes yes.
Aw: Okay, oh my god.
Dr. Gamble: Because Legos are cool, and I had them.
Alie: [laughs] Why not?
Dr. Gamble: If you’re a grad student, play with Legos. [laughs] But the math was like Legos, like building blocks.
I could put an integral or derivative together and put tensors together and reconstruct them, break
them down, and make new ones. And I made some new math, it’s like fake new math but it’s an
operation that didn’t exist before and I needed it to do my work. So, I was like, again, why doesn’t
this exist? If it’s not there, then create it. So again, I was trained as an artist, I put the paintbrush
down and picked up a piece of chalk for math. It used the same parts of your brain, that’s what I
used the whole time, the creative aspect of your brain. That’s how I did my work.
Alie: So, can you explain where Einstein’s calculations don’t really apply to some of what’s out there? I
understand that [Dr. Gamble laughs] dark matter might not totally fit in with the theory of
relativity. There’s something where it’s like “Uh-uh, this doesn’t work here.” What’s going on there?
Dr. Gamble: So, okay. So, no. Einstein’s field equations, which is the principle equation for general relativity.
Aside: And remember, general relativity is all about how mass affects the four dimensions of time
and space, but not for all stuff. Things get really weird when you get to particles smaller than
atoms.
Dr. Gamble: It doesn’t quite work for dark matter or dark energy, we have a best guess, of course, we have
some modified gravity equations... I’m going to leave it there because that’s a whole other topic. 
8
[chuckles] But if you go beyond the event horizon of a black hole, so it’s kind of the outer surface,
that’s the point of no return, right? If you go inside that, relativity fails. [Alie gasps softly] We don’t
know what’s going on, so we’re kind of taking the equations and we’re kind of smearing them
closer and closer slowly, but it’s not as simple as A+B=C. It’s A+(a little change in A)+A+(another
little change in A)+A. We’re trying to sneak up on C or something and not try to use B, right, the
full-fledged equation; we can only do that but so much. And then they fail right at the singularity,
we have no idea what’s going on. We would need something called quantum gravity... [sighs and
laughs]
Aside: So, gravity theories that work with those subatomic particles, but that’s not really
happening yet. It’s a mystery.
Dr. Gamble: But we would need an interpretation of gravity on a quantum scale now, which as of right now, we
don’t have a... I would say a consensus for what that theory should look like. We have a whole
bunch of competing theories. One of them is loop quantum gravity, we have a bunch of other...
string theory is another one, but you need at least seven dimensions to do that.
Alie: [hushed tone] Oh my god.
Dr. Gamble: It’s madness, I know. But you know, we’re working on very simple questions. Does gravity behave
the same way for planets as it does atoms?
Alie: Aha! And that’s where the quantum comes in.
Dr. Gamble: That’s the quantum aspect. Is it the same? If it’s not the same, well then, we need new physics.
Alie: Mm-hm. Oh boy.
Dr. Gamble: How do we test for new physics? We have no idea. [chuckles] I don’t know. [laughs]
Alie: Can you walk me through the anatomy of a black hole? Because what I understand is there’s the
event horizon which is where everything is burning up around the edges and then where is the
singularity? And from what I picture, it’s like a big butterfly net that tapers into something massive.
But how wrong am I?
Dr. Gamble: I cringe whenever I see that.
Alie: I’m so sorry. [both laugh] I just picture the wireframe illustrations. [laughs] I’m sorry.
Dr. Gamble: I try not to kill people for it but it’s like, okay, that’s the best mathematical representation we could
draw. I’m like, “Okay guys, do better. We can...” [Alie still laughing] Okay, so it’s not a funnel.
Alie: Okay.
Aside: Hang onto your hats, people.
Dr. Gamble: So, a black hole is actually a sphere.
Alie: [softly] Whaaat?
Dr. Gamble: Yeah, it’s actually a sphere. So, not only is it a sphere but because the black hole is rotating, it
squishes along the poles so it’s an oblate spheroid.
Alie: Wow.
Dr. Gamble: The Earth is an oblate spheroid, it’s not a perfect sphere because it rotates.
Alie: Like an M&M or like a...
Dr. Gamble: Exactly.
9
Alie: Not-as-squished M&M.
Dr. Gamble: Not as squished M&M. A fat M&M. So, if you think a fat M&M, that’s what a black hole is. [“Oh my
god, it looks like a huge M&M.”] And that’s edge-on, right? So now, if we’re looking bird’s eye view
down, down the pole, you’re going to see a perfect circle.
Alie: Okay.
Dr. Gamble: Because it has what we call, circular, equatorial symmetry. So, it’s perfectly circular along the
equator but as you kind of go up toward the poles, it changes. It’s not a perfect sphere. So now,
that’s the outside of a black hole, right?
Aside: So, along the middle, perfectly round toward the top and bottom, less so. And around the
black hole is a corona, and that’s apparently a billion degrees Celsius, which Americans, that would
be 1.8 billion-and-32 degrees Fahrenheit, in case you’re getting close to one. But yeah, inward from
the corona but before the event horizon is a hot nightlife spot called Ergosphere.
Dr. Gamble: Before we go inside, there’s another area right outside the black hole that’s called the ergosphere.
Ergosphere meaning “work sphere,” or “work region.” The essence of the ergosphere is that
spacetime itself, not you, not just the black hole, but spacetime itself is being dragged around. So, it
is quite, quite impossible for you to stay still in the ergosphere.
Alie: Because it’s getting dragged around.
Dr. Gamble: Because it’s being dragged around the black hole with the blast. The black hole spins, spacetime is
being dragged around. So, not being dragged around like a merry-go-round. So, you can imagine if
you’re on a merry-go-round and you took a picture, a long exposure picture, and you went around
the merry-go-round, your image would smear, right?
Alie: Mm-hm.
Dr. Gamble: That’s what you would see around a black hole in the ergosphere. You could see the back of your
own head.
Alie: Nooo!
Dr. Gamble: Because the light would be dragged all the way around and hit your eyeballs. Yes.
Alie: Okay, spacetime. [Dr. Gamble laughs] In a nutshell, dragging spacetime is so hard to grasp for
someone who is like, “Today is Wednesday, tomorrow is Thursday, dah-dah-dah-dah-dah, I’m this
years old.” What is spacetime in the aspect that it can be dragged?
Dr. Gamble: We’re sitting in this studio, I can clock your time, I can figure out your position in 3D, in 4D. But is
that actually spacetime? No. We are talking about events now, not just points. We have to go to 4D
instead of 3D. So, XYZ and time. 4D, we’re talking about events in spacetime now.
Aside: So, if some cosmic object were flat, it would occupy two dimensions on an X and a Y-axis.
But when something is three-dimensional it has the added dimension of depth, and we exist in a
three-dimensional world. So, I toss a sock at your face and that goes through three dimensions. But
according to Einstein time is not only money, it's also the fourth dimension... Woooo!
Dr. Gamble: So, spacetime doesn’t... They’re going to kill me for this. [Alie laughs] Spacetime doesn’t exist
without events. Okay?
Alie: Okay. Got it. Like plotting points, sort of?
10
Dr. Gamble: Almost like plotting points. So, you can imagine the graph itself, like graph paper, if you could
imagine you put your dog on graph paper. [“Okay.” “All right.”] And now, you can't see the graph
paper.
Alie: Because you’re looking at the dog.
Dr. Gamble: Because you’re looking at the dog. But you know that the dog exists at some point on the graph
paper.
Aside: So, we’re looking at mass and events but can't forget that underneath it all, space and time
are affected and doing all kinds of mysterious things.
Dr. Gamble: That is spacetime. [Alie groans] Yeah. It is there and there may be some quantum interpretation of
it that we haven’t figured out yet on a very, very small, we call it the Planck scale, we’re talking 10-
35 meters, tiny, tiny, tiny. Spacetime, in essence, turns into what is called a quantum foam.
Aside: Yep. It’s actually called, I looked this up, quantum foam or spacetime foam.
Dr. Gamble: So, now it’s terms of just like, a flat, or the graph paper analogy, now you’re talking about
something like whipped cream. So, you’re talking about foam on top of a latte, in terms of not just
events existing but events popping in and out of existence. So now, okay, your dog might be there,
or it might not be.
Alie: Is that superposition, or no? That’s totally different.
Dr. Gamble: That is superposition.
Alie: Ha-ha!
Dr. Gamble: Yes!
Alie: Okay. So, that’s Schrödinger’s dog sort of.
Dr. Gamble: That is, yes. [laughs]
Alie: Okay. Schrödinger’s Gremmie.
Dr. Gamble: That’s where you would start.
Aside: Just a little head’s up, the thought experiment of a cat in a box exposed to a 50-50 chance of
dying from radioactive poison inside the box is 50% a bummer but it was a way for Schrödinger,
who was a founder of quantum mechanics, to highlight that superposition is an absurdity when it’s
scaled up. But superposition (that means something that can exist in multiple states until it’s
observed) has been validated experimentally via photons. And we’re going to talk more about that
in a second but first, we’re going to take a break for sponsors of the show.
We always donate to a cause of the ologist’s choosing thanks to sponsors of the show. And I’ll be
really honest, I realized that I didn’t get the cause that Dr. Gamble wants this to go to but it’s okay
because we’re back next week for Part 2, we’ll donate on behalf of this episode and next episode.
Next week we’ll tell you all about it. But yeah, oops! That’s how fresh these episodes are. I record
this today; you get them tonight. Anyway, thanks, sponsors.
[Ad break]
Okay, so for more on that superposition too you can see the Quantum Ontology episode with Dr.
Adam Becker. But back to black holes and what is happening on the inside to affect the outside?
Alie: So, the event horizon is sort of that equatorial mishmash of things going around. Where is
singularity?
11
Dr. Gamble: It’s at the very, very center. Now, again, because the black hole is spherical, the event horizon is
actually a sphere.
Alie: Oh. Oh! Oh! The whole thing is a sphere.
Dr. Gamble: It’s a sphere, yes! Now, here’s the thing, here’s the caveat. We have four different classifications of
black holes; we have a non-rotating, non-charged black hole which is a Schwarzschild black hole,
cool. We have a rotating black hole that’s uncharged, Kerr black holes, those are your astrophysical
ones. We have charged, non-rotating. And then we have rotating, charged.
Alie: Okay.
Dr. Gamble: Okay. So, that’s our little black hole Punnett square.
Aside: Okay, so think of charged being caffeinated and rotating being the churning stomach of
lactose. So, there’s an oat milk decaf (noncharged, nonrotating), a whole milk decaf one (rotating
but uncharged), a full-caff oat milk (charged, nonrotating), and lastly, a rotating charged, whole
milk, full caffeine. And I guess you can get any of those with spacetime foam, depending on how
good your barista is.
Dr. Gamble: If you have a non-rotating black hole, the singularity is a point, so it’s an infinitely small point
where all our lines, all our paths in spacetime point and you can't get out, they all point down to
the center. As soon as you rotate that thing, it turns from a point into a ring. So, an astrophysical
black hole, because we assume they’re all rotating, right, it would have a ring singularity, not a
point, it would be a ring at the very center.
Alie: And still tiny, tiny?
Dr. Gamble: And still very tiny, tiny.
Alie: What’s in the middle of the ring? [drumroll]
Dr. Gamble: We don’t know yet.
Alie: Blahhh!
Dr. Gamble: So, now you can imagine, instead of you going from a point, you’re now going to something that is
kind of like a ring, a little surface, so you can think of like, a disc that spacetime ceases to exist on
[Alie gasps] and at the very edge of that disc is our event horizon, that’s that ring. Anything inside
that singularity is what we call elsewhere. [slowed and repeated, "Elsewhere.”]
Alie: Elsewhere? Is that actually the term?
Dr. Gamble: It’s the actual technical term.
Alie: No way.
Dr. Gamble: It is the actual technical term. [Alie laughs] We have the past, of course, we have the future. Past
and future, and if you look at an XYZ plot, if I’m pointing up, vertical on the plot, my axis would be
like time, and the horizontal axis would be space, cool. A trajectory that’s exactly at 45 degrees,
would be like traveling at the speed of light.
Alie: ... In that tiny of an area? Sort of?
Dr. Gamble: In that regard, yes. So again, we have to think abstractly here. If I am moving faster than light, I’m
moving closer and closer toward that spatial axis.
Aside: So, the speed of light cuts right through space and time on a graph, which is just a tiny
sliver of where it lands. But that angle would change if you’re beating light on the speed axis.
12
Dr. Gamble: Which means time doesn’t really pass that much, which means time is getting slower and slower
and slower, but I’m covering more and more space... elsewhere.
Alie: No.
Dr. Gamble: So, we have the future, that’s directly up top; the past that’s at the bottom of the axes; and then on
the sides, left and right, we have what’s called elsewhere.
Alie: Bonkers.
Dr. Gamble: Bonkers, right?
Alie: So, time is... That viscoelasticity, that is partly, like, time expanding?
Dr. Gamble: In a sense, yes.
Alie: Okay.
Dr. Gamble: But that was a new term that I came up with in grad school so it’s not very popular. It’s out there,
you can go read my dissertation if you want nightmares. [laughs]
Alie: I imagine there’s a lot of math in it.
Dr. Gamble: There are 200 pages of math.
Alie: Oh my god. And then if something gets, say, sucked into a black hole... So, from what I understand,
it’s gravity condenses in that singularity? Sort of? It’s just pulling it into it?
Dr. Gamble: Sort of. So now, you can imagine, we go back to the putty, right? It’s the best analogy I can probably
give you. Go back to the putty, you hold it in your hand, right? Imagine your hand being spacetime
but the putty is an atom of some kind. If you keep squeezing your hand around the putty, you are
simulating spacetime shrinking and shrinking and shrinking.
Alie: Ohhh!
Dr. Gamble: What happens to the putty? The putty has to condense also. But the putty cannot overcome that
force, which is gravity, shrinking things down. So, now you have no choice but to fall all the way
towards the singularity. Well, how long is that going to take? An infinite amount of time because
the duration of time becomes slower and slower and slower.
Alie: Ohhh!
Dr. Gamble: But you're covering more and more space.
Aside: So, putty is matter and your hand would represent the squish of gravity as spacetime
condenses. So, this matter, the putty, gets slowly condensed toward a tiny point, it’s like a cosmic
stress ball on a Zoom call that feels like it’s never going to end.
Dr. Gamble: Space will stretch out, time will contract.
Alie: Nuts.
Dr. Gamble: So, when do you reach the singularity?
Alie: You could maybe...
Dr. Gamble: Never.
Alie: Never? Oh my gosh. [gasps]
13
Dr. Gamble: Never. Now, according to... Other theorists are going to listen to this, according to our theories,
never. But we need new science, we need physics, we need quantum gravity. Quantum gravity is
probably going to be the buzzword for this. [laughs] Yeah, we need quantum gravity.
Alie: And there are innumerable black holes out there?
Dr. Gamble: There are probably trillions of black holes out there.
Alie: Trillions of black holes! And when you’re studying them, so much of this is theory based on what
kind of math can work. What about things like LIGO and things like the imaging of the event
horizon that came out a couple years ago that looked kind of like a glowing orange disc?
Aside: Okay, so for one of my other jobs, a TV job, Innovation Nation on CBS, I got to interview one
of the data scientists imaging this event horizon of the black hole M87 and her name is Dr. Katie
Bouman. Let’s roll the tape.
[clip of Alie narrating on Innovation Nation]
The event horizon of a black hole is its surface, a sort of point of no return. And therein lies the
name of the project of which Katie was a part, the Event Horizon Telescope, an international
collaboration capturing images of black holes using a global array of eight telescopes.
Dr. Gamble: So, the glowing orange disc is called a photon ring. You are watching the very extreme matter as
it’s falling into the black hole. We are quite literally taking an image of the edge of spacetime. If you
were to take a picture of the last thing a photon would see before it fell in, that’s probably it. We
are trying to get even closer. So, now I am on a mission concept team to kind of extend that Event
Horizon Telescope concept into space so we can look even deeper. So, we’re trying to peer right on
the very edge of the event horizon. What does that look like? What radiation can we collect? What
do the photons look like? How are we going to collect weird matter? Do we see anything else
there? Is that where aliens exist?
Alie: Yeah!
Dr. Gamble: I don’t know. [laughs]
Alie: How far away do you have to go to keep looking at those? And how far away was the photon ring
that was imaged?
Dr. Gamble: The popular images that you see are both of Sgr A*. Our Milky Way’s supermassive black hole, and
another supermassive black hole called M87. So, of course, these are catalog names and
astronomers love cataloging things. Yikes. We have very weird names for shit, and I don't
understand why. [Alie laughs] Just pick one system and stick to it. Anyways, M87 presents itself as
a very unique and very energetic black hole; it’s at the right perfect angle for observing, it's got a
lot of activity around the disc, it's rotating very rapidly and we like that, it's emitting in all types of
spectra across the electromagnetic spectrum between radio, through gamma rays, cosmic rays, Xrays, infrared, all of them.
Aside: And for more on X-rays, we have a Radiology episode, as well as an Invisible Photology
episode with an expert physicist on this about invisibility cloaks. And yeah, we’re going to link
those in the show notes.
Yeah, so this black hole, M87, it’s got a nice variety of rays and we’re like, "Ooh, thank you. We can
use these. We like you.”
Dr. Gamble: So, it’s a very nice, well-behaved, as I like to say, black hole. [Alie laughs] There are others that are
out there that are misbehaving, I’m like, why are you doing this? Stop it. Stay still. Stop merging.
[Alie laughs] You don’t need to merge again after you’ve merged a first time.
14
Aside: And yeah, if black holes can't escape each other’s gravity, they can swallow each other, like
two cell phone providers that suddenly merge and you’re like, where do I even pay you bastards?
Dr. Gamble: So, that’s what we’re trying to see. Are photon rings that are the same around every black hole? Are
there other photon rings that we haven’t seen? Are there different types of photon rings? Can we
catch photon rings in two different directions? What happens? So, there’s a lot of new science, a lot
of new things that are out there. Have we figured them out yet? No. That’s why we send stuff to
space and observe. [laughs]
Alie: And now, you work with NASA.
Dr. Gamble: Yeah.
Alie: And NASA Goddard. How long have you been with NASA? What was that like?
Dr. Gamble: So, I started August 2021. They kind of found me. Of course, everybody applies to NASA, and you
send your application out and you’re like, “Okay, I didn’t get picked, I’m going to move on.” But
then they said, “Hey, do you want to interview?” I was like, "The fuck? Yes. Are you spamming me?”
[Alie laughs] And this was the Deputy Director, my current boss. I’m like, you’ve got to be fu...
You’ve got to be kidding me. Are you real? Okay.”
Alie: Did you check the email address to make sure it wasn’t like, NASA44445@hotmail. [laughs]
Dr. Gamble: I checked it four times.
Alie: Yeah. [laughs]
Dr. Gamble: So, I put together like 30 slides of the work I was doing post-grad school. It was unfunded, it was
unsupported, I was just doing it on the side. I was like, “One day, I’m going to present this to
somebody and they’re going to like it.” Turns out it was NASA.
Alie: Oh my god.
Dr. Gamble: Which got me my job now. [laughs] They loved it. And were like “You were doing this... Who did
you collaborate with?” I’m like, “Nobody.” “Oh, did you... So, how were you supported?” I’m like, I
didn’t have funding for this, I just did it because I liked it. And they were so impressed by it.
Alie: That’s got to be so gratifying.
Dr. Gamble: It was so gratifying. Now, it gets even better. I tell my mom this and she’s like, "Shut up.” I’m like,
“Yeah, Mom. NASA.” She’s like, “When are you starting? Did you get your job?” I’m like, they haven’t
offered me anything yet, don’t jinx it. It was a four-month process. Another interview, that’s when
my official offer came in. And I was like, okay, do I leave my current job and work for NASA? Or do I
make more money here? My mom was like, “Why are you thinking about this? [Alie laughs] What
are you doing?” I’m like okay, yeah, I’m being stupid. Sure, I’m going to accept.
My very first day at my dream job at NASA was the day of my mom’s birthday, August 16, 2021. So,
I gave her, [laughs] my job acceptance to NASA for her birthday, that was her birthday gift. I was
like, “Mom, I finally got to NASA.” So, we both were like, on the phone like, “I know! I’m crying too!”
It was yes, it was truly amazing, and I had to get her T-shirts and I still probably owe her NASA Tshirts, even though she has three.
Alie: And it all started with a, “Is the Sun on fire?”
Dr. Gamble: It all started with, "Is the Sun on fire?” Yeah.
Alie: Did you ever find that placemat? What restaurant was it?
15
Dr. Gamble: I have no idea where it’s at now. Mom, if you still have it, keep it because it’s probably gold. [Alie
laughs] Pluto is on there and they don’t make those anymore.
Alie: Yeah, it’s a collector’s item either way.
Dr. Gamble: It’s truly a collector’s item.
Alie: Can I ask you questions from listeners?
Dr. Gamble: Yes.
Alie: Okay, because we have [sings] a loooooot. Oh my god, so many. Okay.
----------
So, next week, we will ask Dr. Ron Gamble, a smart person, all kinds of not-smart and very smart
questions in the thrilling and the heavy conclusion of black holes, including all of your questions
from Patreon. Meanwhile, we’ve linked his work and social media in the show notes along with a
ton of related episodes that you might love and get cosmic vertigo from.
We also have shorter episodes that are classroom-friendly, they’re okay for kids and those are
called Smologies and those are linked in the show notes as well as our social media. We’re @Ologies
on Instagram and Twitter, I’m @AlieWard all over the place. To become a patron and submit your
questions, and maybe hear your name, including audio questions we may play your voice on the
show, sign up at Patreon.com/Ologies; it’s just a dollar to get in there. Ologies Merch is available at
OlogiesMerch.com.
Thank you, Erin Talbert, for adminning the Ologies Podcast Facebook group, Aveline Malek makes
our professional transcripts, the wonderful Noel Dilworth is our scheduling producer. Susan Hale is
our managing director, the dark matter that holds us all together. Kelly R Dwyer does the website,
Nick Thorburn wrote the theme music, and our supermassive editor swirling this all together into
an episode is Mercedes Maitland of Maitland Audio.
And if you stick around until the end of the episode, I tell you a secret. You’re going to get three
today, can you believe it? Okay, number 1, those boots that I mentioned up top, I’m not going to
gate-keep those, they’re made by TAFT, and I only know that because I looked on Dr. Gamble’s
Instagram and I was like, “Oooh, what are those boots?” after he wore them to my house. They’re
lovely boots, I just want to let you know. Take a gander, gorgeous. They are not a sponsor of this
show at all, I’m just shouting them out.
Two, I recorded a bunch of this voice-over already and then I went to go edit it and realized that my
mic hadn’t been on... [drawn out horn sound] It happens infrequently but when it does, I want to
take something wet and floppy, like an alive jellyfish, and I want to hit myself in the face with it. But
it’s okay, we got to the end.
The least casual secret I’m going to tell you is that on March 1st, I’m having some surgery. What am I
having done? Is it elective? Is it cosmetic? Is it urgent? Are they going to know I’m a fake redhead
and not give me too much anesthetic? Should I do an Anesthesiology episode, groggily? I might see
if they let me take my whole kit into the operating room, I don’t know if that’s a violation of my own
HIPAA laws. Anyway, I won't tell you quite what it is yet, we’ll wait to get a little more information.
But I’m going to try my best in early March to recover okay, we’ll see what we can crank out during
that recovery and yeah, we’ll learn some stuff from it, eventually. But yeah, March should be
interesting. Next week obviously, we’ll be back with the thrilling conclusion of Black Holes Part 2.
Stay tuned. Okay, berbye.
1
Black Hole Theory Cosmology Part 2 with Dr. Ronald Gamble,
Jr.
Ologies Podcast
February 28, 2024
Oh hey, it’s once again your friend’s dog with the snaggletooth, Alie Ward. We’re back with Part 2 of
Black Holes. Whoo! Do yourself a favor, do yourself an honor by listening to Part 1 for Black Holes
101. And once again, this ologist is a cosmic origins scientist in the Astrophysics Science Division at
NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. We were introduced by a previous Ologies guest,
Dr. Raven the Science Maven Baxter, and this was recorded in my home studio over a few cups of
tea, with my geriatric poodle goblin at our feet.
But before we get into it, thank you so much to everyone at Patreon.com/Ologies who submitted
questions about wormholes and dimensions and flim-flam. We’re going to get into it. You can
submit questions if you’d like, for a dollar a month. You can be a patron, or you can upgrade a tier
and we may play your audio questions, your voice on the show. Also, thank you to everyone who is
wearing Ologies merch from OlogiesMerch.com and who rates and leaves us a review so that I can
read a freshie, like this one from Kikiwella who wrote in that they:
... woke up from a surgery and immediately recommended Ologies to the nurse who was in the
OR with me lol I love the show.
Kikiwella, I hope you’re on the mend. Also, if you listened to the secrets at the end of last week’s
episode, Black Holes Part 1, you might already know that I myself am going in for some surgery on
March 1st
. Feel free to guess what it might be, but yeah, you’re going to get a Field Trip out of it
eventually with all the details but first, we’ve got to see how it goes.
Okay, speaking of blacking out, let’s dive into the singularity of information and learn about time
travel, multiverses, sizes of black holes, pop culture, visualizations, how to get in the field, problemsolving, some petty-ass scientists, what we know about black holes, what we don’t know and why
we don’t it, with Theoretical Astrophysicist and Black Hole Theory Cosmologist, Dr. Ronald Gamble.
----------
Alie: Can I ask you questions from listeners?
Dr. Gamble: Yes.
Alie: Okay. Because we have [sings] a looooot! [Dr. Gamble laughs] Oh my god, so many.
Aside: Straight out of the gate, patrons Audrey Hudak, Nicky Gevirtz, Lizzy Martinez, Ryan
Marlow, Penny Loader, Sarah Meaden, Nicole Harper, and Matt Ceccato needed Dr. Gamble’s pop
cultural assessments, such as...
Alie: Rachel wants to know: “This is Rachel from Oregon and I want to know, of all of the movies that
depict black holes in some form, which one does the best job, and which one does the worst job?”
Dr. Gamble: Okay, so this is actually a very easy question, and if you haven’t seen this movie, shame on y’all.
[Alie laughs] But the best movie that I have seen that depicts black holes is Interstellar.
Alie: Really?
Dr. Gamble: Yes. [dramatic music “We must reach far beyond our own lifespans.”] Now, I haven’t seen every
single movie on black holes, y’all, so if there’s an indie film that you want me to see, just send it to 
2
me and I’ll review it. But Interstellar did a very great job, as best they could, to depict black holes
the way they actually look. So, Gargantua, that scene, how the light curved around the black hole,
the disc, if you were to actually go to a black hole and you were that close, it may very well look like
that. [“Heading towards blackness.” static sounds. “It’s all black. TARS, you read me? It’s all
blackness.”]
Alie: Really?
Dr. Gamble: Now, of course, there would be a whole bunch of other things around it, we’re talking about a
supermassive black hole. Gargantua is bigger than our galaxy’s black hole, so this thing is huge. Of
course, there would be other things but if we’re just talking about the black hole, that was very
accurate.
Aside: So, the 2014 Matthew McConaughey and Jessica Chastain sci-fi spacetime-bending flick,
Interstellar, was, of course, the most mentioned movie by patrons with folks Bálint Novák, Jani
Rounds, Sydney Koenig, Nathan Marion, Olivia Coppin, Katy, Abraham Livingston and first-time
question-asker, Joe: Wanted to know about accuracy and the time-dilation in the movie, as gravity
slows time for the movie’s space explorers so much that as one hour passes for them, seven years
go by on Earth.
Dr. Gamble: The time they spent down on the planet compared to the time for the scientists still up on board,
very accurate, that is exactly, probably, how it would be.
Alie: Did they have a good consultant, do you think?
Dr. Gamble: They did, they had Kip Thorne.
Alie: Oh, well there you go. [laughs]
Dr. Gamble: Yeah! I mean, yeah! You had Kip consulting you, yeah, you’re going to get this right.
Aside: Okay, remember in Part 1 when we mentioned that huge 1973 textbook, Gravitation, and
how it was co-authored by this Nobel Prize winner, Kip Thorne. That’s him. Yeah, that’s him. Also,
the visual effects team of Interstellar innovated all these new ways to simulate black hole imagery
and they actually published their findings in a 2015 study called, "Gravitational lensing by spinning
black holes in astrophysics, and in the movie Interstellar.” Who is a co-author on that paper? Kip
Thorne. Again. He’s 83, he lives a few miles away from me, one day I hope to run into him at Target,
I know what he looks like, and I want to ask him, "Who decides on the names of black holes in
movies?” But I’ll do it politely.
Alie: How do you feel about the word Gargantua? Is it like Unobtainium in Avatar where you’re like,
"Little on the nose”?
Dr. Gamble: It’s better than stupendously large. Stupendously large, I kid you not, is a technical term for the
massive black holes that are [Alie laughs] I would say probably 50 to 100 billion times, 100 times
larger than supermassive black holes. We had to create a new category of black holes and they’re
called stupendously large black holes. I kid you not. You heard it today. It’s a real thing; you can
google it, it’s on Wikipedia and probably in somebody’s paper somewhere. Yeah. [laughs]
Alie: Was there a 5-year-old with a place mat who got to name it? Like an actual, they’re like, "Uh
stupendously.”
Dr. Gamble: Probably. [laughs] Somebody’s kid named this. He’s like, what do you call it? “Stupendous.” Okay.
Yeah. That’ll work.
Alie: That works! And elsewhere, I had no– God, so many tattoos you could get.
3
Dr. Gamble: [laughs] Yes!
Aside: So, stupendously large, seems to have emerged as an official science term in 2020 via the
paper, “Constraints on Stupendously Large Black Holes.” But in order to qualify as one, you would
have to be larger than 100 billion times the mass of our Sun. Also, we would call you a SLAB, which
is another official term for Stupendously Large Black Holes. SLAB is a compliment, don’t get upset.
Now, if you’re wondering about teeny, teeny black holes, there are suspicions that they could be as
tiny as one atom but weigh as much as a mountain, according to the NASA article, “What Is a Black
Hole?” which notes that “This page was written for children Grades K-4” but... worked for me! So
yeah, ask smart people stupendous questions because stupendous comes from a Latin word
meaning “to marvel at something.”
But between the teenies and the SLABs, there are also marvelous supermassive black holes, and we
had questions from Iso Partee, Euan Munro, Alan Gross, Kate Noonan, Bill LaBranche, and...
“This is Liz Spanier from Metamora, Illinois and my question is: How do you tell the difference
between a regular ol’ black hole and a supermassive black hole? And also, are there any other
types of black holes and does it really matter if there’s a difference?”
Alie: I guess there’s stupendous. When it comes to a black hole and supermassive, is it just scale or it’s
also performance, what they do?
Dr. Gamble: It’s just scale. So, we’re talking about just one number and that’s mass. So, a supermassive black
hole, as of now, they have been found inside the center of galaxies.
Aside: Such as for example like ours such as.
Dr. Gamble: That doesn’t mean they have to exist there. There could be one somewhere else and we probably
wouldn’t see it because it’s black, which is very scary to have a billion solar mass thing out there
that we can't see. [“There’s something out there, isn’t there?”] But it’s just mass. So, black holes are
probably the simplest things that you can study in the universe. You only need four numbers: mass,
spin (which is angular momentum), the area of the event horizon, and we like to say a fourth one
that is kind of geared toward the effect of the black hole or kind of like the luminosity of the black
hole. Physicists would call that entropy or another term for it. Observational astronomers would
call it flux or luminosity, or brightness. So...
Alie: Is that dependent on how many photons are getting sucked into it?
Dr. Gamble: Yes. That depends on how many are going in and how many are coming... Not coming out of the
black hole, [chuckles] but irradiating away from the black hole. This is how we can actually see
black holes.
Alie: Ohhh!
Dr. Gamble: The matter around the black hole radiates light.
Aside: So yeah, scientists study the mass, the spin (or the angular momentum), how big the event
horizon is, and its brightness or entropy because they radiate light.
Alie: How does it do that?
Dr. Gamble: Very simply, if you take a charge and you accelerate it, it will radiate light. And depending on what
energy scale it’s at and depending on how much the energy changes depends on what spectrum of
light you get between radio, gamma rays, microwaves, infrared, all of that. So, the light that’s going
into the black hole, we can't see. But there’s light coming away from the black hole and that’s how
we observe them.
4
Alie: That’s bonkers to me!
Dr. Gamble: Now, it’s not escaping from inside the black hole. Again, theorists... [chuckles softly] Don’t get picky.
It’s not escaping the black hole from inside. This is, again, we’re outside. So, we’re thinking the
ergosphere and further out. There are objects that are coming off of black holes, and these are
some of the things that I study at NASA, called relativistic jets. You can think of them as black hole
lighthouses. They are quite literally fountains coming off, they’re like black hole lasers.
Alie: Wow.
Dr. Gamble: I’ve already put that in a paper, people, so don’t steal it. [Alie laughs]
Aside: You can see his 2022 paper, "Spin Tetrad Formalism Of Circular Polarization States In
Relativistic Jets.” And this is a 10-pager, it’s full of equations and it concludes with the line, "There
are still fundamental questions that continue to remain unresolved.”
Alie: Or make it a terminology that everyone uses.
Dr. Gamble: Or yeah. As long as you cite me, please. [both laugh] There’s a bunch of different things that we
have coming away from a black hole but not necessarily coming from inside. Once you are inside,
that’s it, you are done, you can say goodbye to student loans [Alie laughs] and debt and taxes and
everything else. It’s done. Like, COVID doesn’t exist inside of a black hole, you’re done. You may not
see anybody else, but you don’t have anything else to...
Alie: Nothing to worry about.
Dr. Gamble: Nothing to worry about.
Alie: No worries!
Dr. Gamble: It’s just you and your thoughts and God, maybe. [laughs]
Alie: No exes. Amazing. [“Absolute... nothingness.”] Calm.
Okay, so many questions. Erica Smith and Lily, Valerie Bertha, Aileen Lands want to know, in
Aileen’s words: Do black holes have a lifespan? Is there any way to know how old it is?
Dr. Gamble: That’s a very good question. The answer, short answer is yes, they do have a lifespan. The long
answer is, we don’t exactly know how to calculate that, entirely. Again, theorists, don’t be picky. So,
we have a really cool physicist, last name Hawking, first name Stephen.
Alie: Heard of him.
Dr. Gamble: He came up with a theory about evaporating black holes. So now, let’s imagine this, I have a pair of
particles, I will keep this brief. You have a pair of particles, you have one electron, and you have
what’s called a positron.
Alie: Okay.
Dr. Gamble: Okay. So, a positron is the antimatter pair of an electron.
Aside: So, the legendary British astrophysicist, Stephen Hawking, figures prominently in anything
black hole-related. But this is some friction and some chafing because he may have been a bit dicey
in his personal life, but his work is still deeply influential, of course. And this theory about
evaporating black holes hinges on these pairs of matter and antimatter which have the same mass
but opposite charges. So, the positron, which has a positive charge, can be the result of natural
radioactive decay. And of course, the antimatter to a positron is the electron. Vice versa.
5
Dr. Gamble: Imagine them as just twins. If you throw one twin into the black hole but the other twin gets kicked
out away from the black hole, the twin that left the black hole will take away some angular
momentum and energy from the black hole. [“I’m taking this with me.”] What do you do when you
take angular momentum away from something that’s spinning?
Alie: It slows a little.
Dr. Gamble: It slows down. If something slows down that means it lost energy.
Alie: Oh!
Dr. Gamble: Now, if something is that massive and we’re talking about gravity and spacetime and light speed
and relativity this and Einstein that, then that means it also lost mass.
Alie: Yeah, I was wondering! So, they get smaller...?
Dr. Gamble: So, it’s going to get smaller. Now, that’s just one particle. If I scale that up to a trillion trillion, over
the course of, I would say, maybe billions of years, the black hole will eventually evaporate.
Alie: Aha! Billions of years.
Dr. Gamble: Billions of years, yes. Now, supermassive black holes, we don’t know if they actually evaporate
because that means the galaxy is gone.
Alie: Oh.
Dr. Gamble: Yeah, we’ve never seen a galaxy just randomly pop out of existence.
Alie: Mm? Okay.
Dr. Gamble: Which would be scary, actually because now physics is really broken. What happened? But stellar
mass black holes, which are black holes that are the size of our Sun, they could evaporate.
Aside: So, particle by particle, things just evaporating. Imagine the gradual disappearance of a
supermassive black hole, like Sagittarius A* at the center of the Milky Way. That is about 14.6
million miles or 23 million kilometers in diameter. 23 million kilometers. And it’s 4.3 million times
bigger than the Sun, which if our Sun were a purse, you could cram 1.3 million Earths in it.
But smaller black holes, are prone to that total evaporation, obviously in a shorter amount of time.
But guess what, jerks? There was a 2023 paper titled, “Gravitational Pair Production and Black
Hole Evaporation,” which published calculations showing that anything with gravity – i.e., every
object in the universe, including our faces, would eventually evaporate. Get silly. Time’s a wastin’.
Nothing matters.
Alie: And would it take a long time for that?
Dr. Gamble: It would still take a long time. So, you know, of course, our Sun is a few billion years old, the Earth
is about 4.5 billion years old, maybe 3 billion, so it would still take a long time. But in terms of
peering back further and further in time, the further we look out into space, the farther back in
time we’re actually seeing.
Alie: Which still boggles my mind.
Dr. Gamble: Blows my mind too and I study this. [both laugh]
Aside: And that’s because the light takes billions of years to get to us so we’re seeing events on a
bit of a time delay, like how west coasters watch Saturday Night Live.
Dr. Gamble: But if we had telescopes that could look further and further back, we might be able to see a black
hole evaporate.
6
Alie: Oh man.
Dr. Gamble: Which would be crazy. I know. So, fingers crossed... NASA. [Alie laughs] But that’s like the holy
grail, if we were to ever see one, what would it look like? Could we... Would we recognize it? Would
be the first question. I don’t know.
Alie: I wonder if anyone has seen one but just didn’t know what it looked like.
Dr. Gamble: That’s how we discovered comets.
Alie: [gasps] Really?
Dr. Gamble: Kind of, yeah. They were like, “What is this? this looks like a star but it’s moving and has a tail.”
Alie: When was this?
Dr. Gamble: Probably thousands of years ago.
Alie: 1975.
Dr. Gamble: 1975. Yeah.
Alie: [laughs] Someone’s like, “What is that?”
Aside: So, people have been seeing comets for thousands and thousands of years, ever since things
had eyes but, of course, they were once considered a terrible omen or just aliens coming to eat us,
understandably. I’d think the same thing.
But one thing not fully understood by me and some of you is the Big Bang. So, patrons Kenn
Lippert, Duckman’s 9-year-old future astronaut son, Charlie, and...
Alie: Matt Hirschl, Brian Schardt, C dB, John Salaun, Greg Lewis, TayBo33, Matt asked: What is the
chance the Big Bang was our universe going through a black hole? Where does the Big Bang factor
into black holes?
Dr. Gamble: Holy crap, okay.
Alie: Right?
Dr. Gamble: All right, so I’m going to try to... [Alie laughs] I’m going to try and keep this to 30 seconds. And... Go.
[“All right... Go.”] Okay. So, now the Big Bang... we have– I’ve already fucked up. [Alie laughs] The
Big Bang... You have to think of, you have to go beyond our traditional normal, I would say,
relativity. We now are extending into things like string theory, you have to go even further beyond
that and start now talking about a multiverse of things. So now, mathematically, in terms of our
physical theories, we call that braneworld theory or M-theory. Now, we’re talking about, okay, well
our universe is kind of like a bubble and another universe is another bubble. What happens when
the bubbles both touch? [drumroll] Bang.
Alie: Oh!
Dr. Gamble: So, that’s a theory.
Alie: Okay.
Dr. Gamble: Yeah. Was it a black hole? Don’t know. Are black holes portals to somewhere else? Maybe.
Mathematically, there is a symmetric half to the black hole called a white hole.
Alie: Realllllly?
Dr. Gamble: That instead of pulling everything in, it pushes everything out.
Alie: Whaaat?
7
Dr. Gamble: We need balance through the universe. [Alie gasps] The math admits what’s called a white hole that
spews everything out and doesn’t pull anything in, that balances out our complete solution of black
holes.
Aside: Again, my face just turned into rubber with the laxity of my jaw. Huh? And white holes are
sometimes called black holes’ neglected twins. Did you know that the supermodel Gisele
Bündchen, she has a twin, she’s named Patty, they’re fraternal. I bet you didn’t know about her.
Alie: Can we see or detect those at all?
Dr. Gamble: We would have no idea what those would look like.
Alie: They don’t have photons coming out like a disco ball?
Dr. Gamble: We don’t know what they would spew out because if you’re pushing something out, where did it
come from?
Alie: I don’t know. The singularity?
Dr. Gamble: It wouldn’t be a singularity if something is coming out of it.
Alie: Ohhh!
Dr. Gamble: Oh! So, now we have to talk about things like what’s called an Einstein Rosen Bridge which is
wormholes!
Alie: Oh, a wormhole!
Dr. Gamble: I was waiting for the right second to put that in.
Alie: I’m sure that we got a ton of questions, and I will list people in an aside.
Aside: Wormholes, wormholes, wormholes, wormholes. Let’s go down one for patrons Mark
Hewlette, Pavka34, Gemma, Felipe Jimenez, Tim Pfarr, Juliana, and first-time question-askers
Ashley Marrs, and Jenna Congdon’s husband Dan.
Alie: [groans] Let’s talk about it.
Dr. Gamble: Okay. So, wormholes. If you connect a black hole and a white hole together, you’d have a tube. So
now, what can you do with a tube? You can go through it. But you take one sheet of spacetime, and
you fold it around another sheet, and you poke a hole through it, that’s a wormhole.
Alie: How do you poke a hole in it?
Dr. Gamble: I don’t know.
Alie: Okay.
Dr. Gamble: I say I don’t know, but I do know, but it would take another three hours to explain. [both laugh] But
you need exotic matter, and we say exotic matter, we’re not talking about electrons, we’re not
talking about photons, we’re not talking about antimatter or dark matter. We’re talking about
exotic, something that we don’t even know exists yet, but it can't be our regular matter because it
doesn’t have the properties to actually hold a wormhole open. Now, Interstellar, again, was very
good at describing and showing the wormhole as a sphere. If a black hole is a sphere, then one
opening to the wormhole would be a sphere and the other opening to the wormhole would be
another sphere.
Aside: And for more on wormhole portals, you can see the 2020 paper, "Multi-mouth Traversable
Wormholes,” which honestly starts off kind of like a chipper travel brochure reading, "Our 
8
wormholes may be traversed between any pair of mouths.” But then the paper continues kind of
like a DIY video on building a spacetime tunnel saying:
Inserting a sufficiently small black hole into its throat preserves traversability between the
original two mouths... Making the new wormhole traversable in a manner similar to the
original two-mouth wormhole provides the desired causal connections.
Is this paper sexy? I feel like it’s sexy. I can't tell!
But let’s hop into a hole and take us to the 2021 article by the American Physics Society. This is
titled, maybe prematurely, “Wormholes Open for Transport,” and it explains that previously, it was
thought that wormholes could stay open with what’s called exotic matter. Exotic matter is also
known as “ghost matter” (I prefer that) but some researchers recently used a model of quantum
entanglement to prop that sucker open.
Now, if you just cannot wait to get the hell away from your life, consider the 2021 paper, “Humanly
traversable wormholes,” or “Wormhole models that involve five-dimensional spacetime.” I
understand that a human being would experience about 20 Gs of survivable force, about twice
what a fighter pilot is trained to take, but you could bop about the galaxy in under a second as all of
your sad friends on Earth experience thousands of years of time waiting for you to return their
“Hey, how is the wormhole?!” text. Ghosted? Ghost-mattered.
Moving on.
“Hi, this is Debra and I’m in Placentia, California and I kind of get how black holes affect
space... I’m just wondering how black holes affect time? Thank you.”
Dr. Gamble: Because that’s what the geometry, that’s what the math tells us. These are two spheres, connected
together through some bridge in spacetime.
Alie: Got it.
Dr. Gamble: Where do you go? You go into some intermediate hyperspace connecting one 4D space to another
4D space.
Alie: And that bridge is what we don’t know?
Dr. Gamble: That bridge as well, we have no idea.
Alie: And that could be time travel?
Dr. Gamble: It could be time travel.
Alie: But not time travel like going back to, like, three months before you...
Dr. Gamble: No, you’re not going back three months, you’re going like... maybe a million light years somewhere
else, and now you’re figuring out, “Okay, well I hope the bridge behind me doesn’t close because
now, how do I get back?” [laughs]
Alie: Do you think one day we’ll be able to do that? Like, we have people on the Moon here and there,
we’re sending cars to Mars.
Dr. Gamble: Listen, human ingenuity is undefeated, so I think, I give it another 10 to 1,000 years. That’s a very
wide range. [laughs]
Alie: Okay. That’s a good timeframe.
Dr. Gamble: Good timeframe.
9
Alie: I might be alive for it, who knows! I might go pop through a wormhole and check it out. [Dr. Gamble
laughs] Who knows? Okay, in talking about all this, a lot of people had questions about anxiety.
Aside: Including Alie Ward, Shannon O’Grady, TheDorkNextDoor, Alex W, and Britt Carpenter.
Alie: Bee wants to know: Why are they so terrifying? Marie-Michelle, first-time question-asker, wants to
know: Do space scientists, when lying in bed at night and contemplating space and vastness, also
experience that intense psychological vertigo? Does it... Is it anxiety-provoking for you in any way?
Or how do people deal with the [squirmy sounds]?
Dr. Gamble: Okay, so I’m not going to lie here. We 100% absolutely lose our shit. [Alie laughs] And that’s part of
the reason why we’re studying this in the first place, because we lost our shit and are like, “Wait a
minute, that was cool. But let me not have this panic attack again and actually work the math.” And
then we panic again because we can't work the math, what am I doing? [Alie laughs] But yes, we do
have some anxiety over discovering new things but then also figuring out, what does that actually
mean? Because something brand, brand new that I’ve never seen before, we don’t have any
answers for. And scientists and theorists don’t like to say, “I don’t know.” We don’t like to say that. I
say it sometimes. I said it in grad school one time, and it didn’t work for my exams. [both laugh] “I
don’t know. We don’t have an answer to this.” And my professor was like, “Well, figure it out!” And
I’m like, I don’t have a Nobel Prize yet, I can't do it!
So yes, we panic sometimes. But we pick ourselves back up and we say okay, well I can figure this
out. And if I don’t figure it out then I’m going to publish a paper saying, “I didn’t figure it out.” And
that’s it. [laughs]
Alie: There’s your answer, we don’t know yet.
Dr. Gamble: We don’t know yet. And then we go back to panicking like, “Oh, there’s a black hole at the center of
our galaxy.” [laughs]
Aside: So, black holes, they’re distant, they’re giant, they’re mysterious, but what do they mean for
us, who are little ape people and nearby and we’re small and we’re transparent in our wants and
desires?
“Hi, I am first-time question-asker Ivan Gonzalez. I am keen to explore the potential
implications that the study of black holes may hold for humanity... and the insights we might
gain about the origin of the universe through this exploration. Thank you.”
Alie: That is such a big part of our everyday lives that we don’t think about, you know? That every single
day, we’re somehow, whether we’re created by, influenced by, that a supermassive black hole
figures into our day-to-day life, we don’t think about.
Dr. Gamble: Our cell phones work because of gravity.
Alie: How so?
Dr. Gamble: GPS.
Alie: Ohhh! GPS, that’s right.
Dr. Gamble: Yeah. Thank you, relativity. Yeah. We have 5G because of relativity even though 5G kind of sucks.
Alie: [laughs] Is there going to be 6G?
Dr. Gamble: I mean, if there is 6G just don’t charge me more, that’s all I care.
10
Alie: [laughs] Okay, so many people, Josh Waldman, first-time question-asker, wants to know: What’s up
with the idea that the Large Hadron Collider could create a black hole? Is this a real concern or just
a weird conspiracy theory?
Aside: Others conCERNed with particle accelerator business are Timmy H, Greg H, Dave Cannon,
Justina Vasiliauskas, Chris Allen, James Dean Cotton, Dirt Witch, Early of Greymalkin, and fellow
first-time question-askers AubGoblin and Matchstick Merryweather. I’m seeing that over time
more of you have weird names and I’m fine with that.
Dr. Gamble: Okay, so for our longtime listeners, first-time callers, no, the LHC is not creating black holes, it’s not
creating portals to somewhere else, we’re not finding aliens or demons, or whatever conspiracy
theories are out there. I’ve read them all and I’m like, “Whyyy y’all?” So no, they’re not creating
micro black holes and I know a lot of people are saying, "LHC is creating...” They’re not creating
black holes. That was a random thought by somebody that that actual conversation was probably
never supposed to be public.
Alie: Oh no! Was that just like lunchroom chatter?
Dr. Gamble: It’s kind of like lunchroom... Yeah. Because we think of these random theories– This is how some of
these theories start. You have to think of something completely random, completely off the wall
and I’m like, “Okay. Well, what if we actually did create a black hole and we threw some atoms
together and they actually smashed but they didn’t blow apart, but they crunched in?” I’m like,
okay, maybe we don’t do that. Is it actually going to happen? No. We know gravity doesn’t behave
that way, we know relativity doesn’t behave that way, we know spacetime doesn’t quite behave
that way, we know black holes don’t form that way. We’re safe. [laughs]
Alie: Okay, good to know. Aren’t there theories that we popped into a different, shittier universe when
they turned that thing on? [“There’s no off switch.” “There is an off switch.”] But I mean, things have
always been a little...
Dr. Gamble: Things have already been shitty.
Alie: Yeah. There are so many universes where you’re like, “How did that happen?”
Dr. Gamble: Okay so theorists, again, don’t be picky, but I have to explain to the public. So, quantum mechanics,
the essence of quantum mechanics is probability. Schrödinger’s cat, or Schrödinger’s poodle...
Aside: Dr. Gamble points to my nearby dog Gremmie so that we could ponder killing her with
radioactive poison to simulate the superpositions of subatomic states of matter. We discussed this
in Part 1 but with a hypothetical cat instead of my daughter.
Dr. Gamble: Which... pick your favorite. You are either alive or you’re not, that was his thought experiment.
You’re either there or you’re not. If you are there, then there’s a probability that you’re not quite
there. Hmm. Now, if we are talking about, going back to events in spacetime now, an event could be
there, or it could not be there. An event could be there and then another event could be there or it
could not be there. Or another event could have been there, but it changed.
Aside: Okay. Don’t be stoned right now because this is going to get weird.
Dr. Gamble: And now, instead of having one timeline of events, we have created a branch in a new timeline.
Alie: Aha!
Dr. Gamble: Ahhh. Now we call that causality. It’s basically our theory version of cause and effect. If I have
Event A that caused Event B, they’re supposed to be after each other and they’re supposed to be on
the same timeline. If B changes timelines, I have created a new universe.
11
Alie: And that’s multiverses.
Dr. Gamble: And it’s kind of multiversal. Yeah. But if B is the cause of something else and it branches again, I
now have what looks kind of like a tree graph.
Alie: Yeah. Fractals, almost?
Dr. Gamble: Fractals almost and now you can have an infinite number of universes according to quantum
mechanics because you have an infinite number of possibilities of how that event transpired.
Alie: Because events are part of spacetime.
Dr. Gamble: Because events are part of spacetime. [laughs]
Alie: Oh fuck!
Dr. Gamble: Fucking fuck.
Alie: [voice quivers] Oh no-o-o!
Dr. Gamble: So, now it’s like, am I actually here, or am I in Cleveland right now or something?
Alie: Does that ever make you think about different yous? What if you didn’t go to that diner with a
placemat? What if you didn’t meet this person?
Dr. Gamble: This is the anxiety that we have. It’s even worse because we know the math, or we’re supposed to
know the math, ha-ha! But we know the math and we know the physics and we think we know all
the physics but then we say, “Um, well, I could have multiple versions of myself according to
quantum mechanics and I could be inside of a box somewhere in Italy having scones or a
croissant.”
Alie: What do they have in Italy? Biscotti? I don’t even know. I’ve never been to Italy either. [laughs]
Dr. Gamble: I’ve never been to Italy either so I’m sorry if I’m offending anybody. I assume they have croissants
in Italy.
Alie: I’m sure they do.
Aside: Okay, just a side note, I investigated this for us, and the most popular Italian pastry is a
horn-shaped thing of, just, flaky bellissimo and it’s called a sfogliatella, I’d never heard of it before
but I looked at a lot of pictures. I want the tourism board of Italy, if you are listening, please extend
an invitation to your country so that I can record some Field Trip episodes and maybe move to the
homeland of my people. Grazie. But yes, at this moment, I’m at my studio with Dr. Gamble, my very
much alive poodle, thank you, and there are no Italian pastries.
Dr. Gamble: Or I could just be here on Ologies, having fun, drinking my Earl Grey tea, which is actually pretty
good, [Alie giggles] or I could just not exist at all, or I could be green or I could be blue or I could
have three arms or I could have three legs or I could have two brains. [“I could be hurtful, I could be
purple, I could be anything you like.”] Or I could fly, or we could actually meet aliens, or we could be
the aliens in another universe.
Aside: For more on those topics, please see our Astrobiology episode with Dr. Kevin Hand, an
actual NASA scientist looking for actual life on real, not-ours planets. We also have an episode on
UFOs.
Dr. Gamble: There are too many possibilities and all it takes is one small, tiny change. If there’s a universe that
exists where we’re wearing white shirts instead of black shirts, there’s a universe that exists where
we’re sitting on the ceiling instead of the floor, this is quantum mechanics. This is Quantum
Mechanics 101.
12
Alie: Do you take bigger risks in life because you’re like, “Well, all I got is this timeline,” and you know...
Dr. Gamble: I take so many more risks in life. [laughs]
Alie: Do you really?
Dr. Gamble: Because I’m like, okay well... I say... Okay, I only have this universe that I’m in. I know there are
probably others that exist that are like me, but I’ve not met them yet, so I only have this universe to
actually maximize in so I’m going to do the best. I’m going to maximize my time here. Yeah.
Aside: And then listen next to the Quantum Ontology episode to become more convinced that you
should do a daring haircut while you’re alive because what’s real? We’re all going to die. Text your
crush. More on that later.
Dr. Gamble: Text your crush. Yes. Please. DM them.
Alie: Works out sometimes... [laughs]
Dr. Gamble: Heyyy!
Aside: And yeah, I do promise more on that in a bit but first, let’s take a break to donate to a
charity of Dr. Gamble’s choosing and for this episode and for Part 1, we’ll be sending a donation for
each of those to TheScienceHaven.org which is dedicated to democratizing science, fostering
curiosity, bridging the gap between complex scientific concepts and the public, and making science
accessible, engaging, and meaningful for all. They have telescope programs called Stellar Dreams,
they have a public lecture series, a sci-comm fellowship, and also Dr. Raven Baxter’s YouTube
series called Nerdy Jobs. So, head to TheScienceHaven.org for more and they are linked in our show
notes. That donation was made possible by sponsors of the show.
[Ad Break]
Okay, let’s get back to your questions from patrons such as Aoife Holmes, June Eskridge, Brittney
Corrigan, and our somewhat space-anxious friends, Kimberly Talbert, and Storm.
Alie: A lot of people, Alan Gross, Caro Young, Christine Pikstein want to know the closest known black
hole. Is it the one in the center of our universe?
Dr. Gamble: No.
Aside: Okay, so fret not. Dr. Gamble mentioned that the closest one is called Gaia BH1 and it’s
about 1,500 lightyears away and M87, the one that was imaged a few years back that we talked
about in Part 1 is 55 million lightyears away! So, by comparison, 1,500 light years away might as
well be lounging on your back deck cracking a beer.
Dr. Gamble: But all right, it’s not that close. [Alie laughs] It’s not that close. We still can't travel to one. We’re
talking... One light year we’re talking millions of miles away. We’re talking millions of miles,
millions of kilometers away. So, we’re talking about 3.7 million, millions of miles away. We can't
get there. Again, we can observe the matter around a black hole, right? And all the funky stuff that
it does, probably having a part around a black hole. “This is the end of the world.” No. [Alie laughs]
We can see the effects that a black hole would have on other things, and we call that gravitational
lensing.
Alie: Oh right. Okay. So, you’re seeing light getting bent a bit.
Dr. Gamble: Yeah.
Alie: Okay.
13
Dr. Gamble: But that’s it. And we can see mergers happen, right? But that’s it. We can only see what the black
hole does to other things but not directly the black hole itself. It’s black for a reason. It probably
doesn’t want to be seen.
Alie: It doesn’t blot out things behind it?
Dr. Gamble: It does, and that’s one property of gravitational lensing and they’re called Einstein Crosses. You can
have a black hole in front of you, and you can have a star behind the black hole, but you won't see
the black hole, but you’ll see four points in the sky that look exactly the same, that’s an Einstein
Cross. That is the light from the star behind the black hole being lensed around the black hole like a
prism in a funhouse, you’re seeing multiple copies of the same thing but there’s only one thing that
exists. So, you’re just seeing mirrored copies of the same thing. But if I were to actually travel to the
black hole and go beyond it, there’s only one star there.
Alie: Yeah, yeah.
Dr. Gamble: But there’s this funhouse effect called lensing that does a whole bunch of weird things and of
course, this is light so we can detect it. We see four stars there, but the four stars aren’t actually
there.
Alie: Yeah. So, that’s evidence?
Dr. Gamble: That’s evidence that some gravitational body is there, more than likely, we can't see it, it’s a black
hole. Sometimes dark matter does that and that’s how we know dark matter is there.
Alie: Ooo-oo-oo.
Dr. Gamble: Yeah. [laughs]
Alie: You mentioned Einstein’s Cross. What about Hawking radiation?
Aside: A surprising number of you asked this including Jason Holdren, Jason Rogers, Ryan
Marlow, Leanna Shuster, Jessica Rudd, C dB, and first-time question-askers Valary Joly, Austin
Thompson and...
Alie: Kate Noonan, first-time question-asker: Can Hawking radiation be used to measure the size of a
black hole?... What is it?
Dr. Gamble: Yes, we can.
Alie: What is Hawking radiation?
Dr. Gamble: Hawking radiation is what we call quantum thermal fluctuations.
Alie: Okay. Quantum...
Dr. Gamble: Those are very big words, I know. So, what we mean by that is we are quite talking about heat
coming off of a black hole on a quantum particle scale.
Aside: So, heat leaving a black hole by really, really very small, subatomic amounts, the smallest
confetti you can imagine, just fluttering away from the dense piñata of a black hole. Smaller than
atoms!
Dr. Gamble: So now, again, we’re talking about quantum particles so we’re talking about individual electrons,
things like that. But again, if we scale it up to trillions and trillions, we can get radiation. Have we
observed Hawking radiation yet? No. Have we tried? Yes. Do we have the right technology yet? No.
[laughs]
Alie: What kind of technology do you need?
14
Dr. Gamble: You would need something that would...
Alie: You need 6G.
Dr. Gamble: We need 6G phones for it, yeah. [laughs] We don’t know yet, actually. I’m trying to wrap my brain
around what the actual spectra would look like, and we still don’t know yet. We haven’t worked
that math out entirely yet to present an observable, something that we can actually measure, we
don’t have that yet. So, Hawking radiation, if you go read his papers, it is absolutely phenomenal.
It’s a beautiful theory. [laughs] We like to call it elegant. We actually say elegant theory. If you’ve
seen Theory of Everything, his movie, we do actually say, "This is an elegant theory,” because it’s
quite amazing.
Alie: Mm-hm. I love these terms. So many great terms. Stupendous, elegant, elsewhere. Just ridiculous. I
love this. But we don’t know yet.
Dr. Gamble: We don’t know yet. [Alie groans] I know, a lot of unknowns.
Alie: I know. Well, speaking of unknowns, a lot of folks wanted to know if you can explain the
information paradox. What is the information paradox?
Aside: Patrons Esohn, Tim McCollow, Vedant Patel, Guido Ferri, and Jani Rounds also needed
information on the paradox of information and this elicited a string of good-natured swearing from
the Doc.
Dr. Gamble: Sorry. Yeah, so the information paradox quite literally is... [deep breath] If I take something like a...
Oh gosh. If I take a Rubik’s cube, we know what that is, take a Rubik’s cube, you’ve solved it
obviously, because we’re all geniuses, [“Not me.”] and you toss it into a black hole, the collection of
information that was compiled to comprise of that Rubik’s cube, we’re talking now a property of
matter called entropy. Entropy is just a configuration of information. The more energy something
has, the more entropy it's supposed to have. Naturally, we see that analogy.
Aside: But entropy can also mean the degradation of the matter and energy in the universe to this
ultimate state of inert uniformity. And Merriam-Webster added, “Entropy is the general trend of
the universe toward death and disorder,” which is true. But like, Merriam, are you okay?
Dr. Gamble: Now, back to our Rubik’s cube, if I toss that into the black hole and it did not come out, that means
our universe lost information because I can't get the Rubik’s cube back. But if I toss a star, a planet,
a rock... the paper I’m supposed to be writing tonight, [chuckles, Alie starts laughing] your rejected
publication, your homework, student loans, taxes, you’d throw that all into the black hole. [Alie still
laughing] You're not getting those back. So, that’s information from our universe that’s lost. So, this
is now what we call an irreversible process.
Some irreversible processes exist in nature that you probably didn’t even think about. Fusion in
the Sun is irreversible because it cascades, we can't stop it. There are other things you’ve seen in
nature that are quite irreversible. Matter breaking apart, some of it is irreversible, you can't put it
back together. But in terms of the fundamental physics, you toss something into a black hole,
beyond the event horizon, we’re not getting that back. There is a theory out there – it’s pretty far
out there – that says, what if my entire universe, there only existed one black hole and the rest of
matter, if I were to somehow toss everything into the black hole, would I still have a universe left?
Alie: I was wondering the same thing.
Dr. Gamble: Question is... I don’t know.
Alie: And then, if you don’t have a universe then is it just all darkness or would we get spit out the other
end from a white hole and then we’d just mishmash again?
15
Dr. Gamble: Does a universe with a white hole have maximal entropy? Because it’s just spewing everything out.
Alie: Could that have been the Big Bang?
Dr. Gamble: Could have been.
Alie: I fixed it. I solved it.
Dr. Gamble: We need more people doing the math.
Alie: People get this math!
Dr. Gamble: People, calculus, please. For the love of god, don’t skip out on calculus.
Alie: Arlo Kay wants to know: Is “Black Hole Sun” by Soundgarden a good song?
Dr. Gamble: Yes.
Alie: Okay.
Aside: So, the chorus to this 1994 hit goes, “Black hole sun, won't you come and wash away the
rain?” And patron Linea Brink Andersen wanted to know: What is a black hole sun and WHY won't
it come? So, I looked into this for us, and I found out that the late singer and lyricist, one Chris
Cornell, had once explained that he wrote the song quickly, and that, "Lyrically, it’s probably the
closest to me just playing with words for words’ sake.” He added that "It worked for a lot of people
who heard it, but I have no idea how you’d begin to take that literally.” Patron Arlo Kay wrote in:
Not really a question but “Black Hole Sun” by Soundgarden is a good song. Dave Brewer wanted Dr.
Gamble to sing the song, but Erica Smith asked if Dr. Gamble had any other favorite black hole
tunes? Are there any?
Alie: How about the album, Supermassive Black Hole by a band I can't remember. But it came out in the
2010s [“Supermassive Black Hole,” starts playing in the background] and I reviewed it for the LA
Times and now I can't remember who sings it. [laughs]
Dr. Gamble: Oh my god! No. That is um um um um um um... Oh my god. No, no, no. [Alie laughs] They are....
[song continues to play] “Supermassive Black Hole.“ Was that Pearl Jam?
Alie: No!
Dr. Gamble: Sorry.
Alie: I can't remember it either. You remember that one? I literally reviewed this for the LA Times.
Dr. Gamble: Um um uhhh! God!
Alie: It went into an information paradox. [song continues to play]
Dr. Gamble: It... quite, yeah.
Alie: I never look things up in between but I...
Dr. Gamble: I’m sorry, we’re cheating.
Alie: We’re cheating. You know what they did, they went into a wormhole. Muse. It was Muse! [record
scratch]
Dr. Gamble: Dammit.
Alie: [laughs] It was Muse!
Dr. Gamble: That’s what it was. That’s what it was, Muse! That was my third guess.
Alie: it was my second and a half.
16
Dr. Gamble: Yes! Oh my god.
Aside: This 2006 hit bears the lyrics, "You set my soul alight, glaciers melting in the dead of night,
and the superstar’s sucked into the supermassive.” I had to go back to my archives, 18 years, to
find a piece that I wrote for the LA Times as a young journalist, and I had written: “The first single,
Supermassive Black Hole,” is a jaw-dropping departure for the band, boasting a baffling, Justin
Timberlake-like falsetto, a bizarrely danceable beat, and infectious riffs.” I actually still stand
behind that. I was prepared to be very embarrassed, but I think that still holds true.
But according to interviews with Muse vocalist, Matthew Bellamy, the song is about how women
are at the center of his galaxy and he’s a bright giant star that gets sucked into their dark, powerful
nothingness. Apparently, women are his muse... and he is Muse, so women are his him. Also, I
didn’t realize that this song was featured in the feature film, Twilight. And yeah, we have a
Vampirology episode, and we discuss that film at length. But yes, it was Muse.
Dr. Gamble: I, yes. Yeah. I’m a Muse fan.
Alie: Okay! I mean, who else has an album about supermassive black holes?
Dr. Gamble: It would be Muse.
Alie: It would be Muse. You’ve got to meet them one day. You’re like, "Let me Kip Thorne your next
album.”
Dr. Gamble: Can I Kip Thorne my way into your album? [laughs]
Alie: [laughs] I know someone in here and I don’t know who asked about LIGO.
Aside: Adam Foote, first-time question-asker, Kate Noonan, and Grant Mildwaters. Grant asked:
When we detected the gravitational waves from the black hole merger (GW190521), 9 suns worth
of mass-energy was converted into the waves. How does mass ‘dissolve’ into warping of
spacetime? Grant, this is not a not-smart question but let’s try to wrangle the basics here.
Alie: Gravitational waves... Being able to like, measure, or detect two black holes colliding... Tell me
about it. What happens?
Dr. Gamble: So, you take one black hole, let’s just say it’s mass 5. You take another black hole and let’s say it’s
mass 3.
Alie: Okay.
Dr. Gamble: They will smash together, first they will rotate around each other, the event horizons of the two
black holes will begin to smear. That is a very violent process.
Alie: I bet.
Dr. Gamble: Yeah, and you’re probably too... Why are you so excited?
Alie: No, [speaks quickly and gruffly] because I’m thinking excited about it like, oh my god... Would it
sound like anything, or no?
Dr. Gamble: Actually, they do.
Alie: Would it sound like... [makes choppy grumbly noises]
Dr. Gamble: No, it doesn’t sound like that.
Alie: I picture like, you know when in a car in the junkyard, they put it through the thresher?
Dr. Gamble: LIGO actually, they sonified the data.
17
Alie: Magic.
Dr. Gamble: Let me see... Oh, I found it. All right, so this is the sound of two black holes colliding together and I
think my phone might work. [deep rumble followed by more static rumble with little blips]
Aside: So, LIGO, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory is part of a
collaboration between CalTech and MIT and each of the two sites involves this 10-foot wide, 12-
foot-tall concrete tube. It’s 2.5 miles long on each arm and it houses a laser that in the presence of a
spacetime blip, will move the laser one one-thousandth of the diameter of a nucleus of an atom.
According to LIGO, this first-ever detection “confirms a key prediction of Einstein's theory of
general relativity and provides the first direct evidence that black holes merge.”
Our Cosmology guest Dr. Katie Mack described the sound detected as “a rapid increase in the
frequency and the amplitude of the gravitational radiation,” which, when presented as a sound
wave, sounds like a chirp or a little tiny, “Whoop.” [little blips, like a small bubble bursting]
Alie: Why is it alternating like that?
Dr. Gamble: Because we are quite literally, they are measuring ripples in spacetime. So, that’s what
gravitational waves are. So, you can imagine if you tossed a rock into a pond and you see it ripple
like that, that’s like a gravitational wave. But again remember, spacetime isn’t actually a physical
thing that we can touch and feel but we measure the displacement or the deformation of things as
the gravitational wave went by. LIGO is an interferometer.
Aside: It involves powerful lasers, which is cool.
Dr. Gamble: One arm is perpendicular to the other arm, you have two lasers, you can probably make one at
home, I’ve made one before. [Alie giggles] Don’t point it at your parents.
Alie: Have good insurance if you do.
Dr. Gamble: Get your insurance, please. [laughs] But one arm would shrink while the other arm would stretch
and that’s how we know a gravitational wave went by and we could measure the amplitude of that
gravitational wave. So, that displacement, it’s on the scale of like, 10-20 meters, it is tiiiiiiny. Tiny,
tiny, tiny. But LIGO and advances LIGO, they’ve done such an incredible job calibrating this
instrument, they could detect traffic miles away underground at LIGO.
Alie: Wow.
Dr. Gamble: There’s one in Louisiana and there’s another one in Washington, Hanford and Livingston. They
could detect very, very sensitive things. This was back in 2015. The 2015 detection, I was in grad
school at the time.
Alie: I was just going to ask where you were because I watched the livestream from a...
Dr. Gamble: I watched the livestream, we were watching it in my department, I think there were maybe three of
us excited about it. I was the only one studying gravitational waves along with my advisor and we
were like “Okay, well we’re going to nerd out while the rest of you are weird. You should be
screaming like at a concert or something.”
Aside: Again, a triumph for the space detectives working on the mystery of the universe. And a
huge day for nerds.
Dr. Gamble: And we were like, “Oh, they did it.” And we’re like, “Okay, well what does this mean?” And now
we’re having anxiety attacks, we actually measured one. Okay, let’s look at the data. I’m like, “Great,
I will drink to this because now I can do the rest of my dissertation.” [laughs]
Alie: So that helped you move on.
18
Dr. Gamble: It quite literally helped me prove one of the solutions in my dissertation.
Alie: No.
Dr. Gamble: One of the wave equations in my solutions, I based it off of that 2015 LIGO data set and recreated
and got the partial waveform back again which told me that my theory actually worked. So, there
are some kinks in there, of course, but getting known data back again... Yes! That is...
Alie: That’s huge.
Dr. Gamble: That is truly huge.
Alie: I mean, the thing is when it’s all theoretical and then when something experimental can prove your
theory, that’s...
Dr. Gamble: It is quite awesome, yeah.
Alie: That’s everything coming together. I mean, augh! [“We have detected gravitational waves. We did
it.” applause]
Okay, last listener questions, Lee Wang, first-time question-asker: Would getting spaghettified
hurt?
Dr. Gamble: Short answer is no because you wouldn’t feel it.
Alie: You wouldn’t feel it. Oh. Average_Pi wants to know: Will I turn into noodles or more like pancakes?
Dr. Gamble: Oooh... Huh! I’ve never had that question before. It’s very interesting.
Alie: I mean, it’s called spaghettification because what, you just stretch out?
Dr. Gamble: You’re stretching. But... Huh! I guess you would flatten if you were rotating.
Alie: Like... [makes spinning sound]
Dr. Gamble: If you were spinning around and stretching toward the center, you would flatten out. [Alie gasps]
That’s interesting.
Alie: So, Average_Pi maybe just opened up a whole can of spaghetti.
Dr. Gamble: Okay, if I write this up in a paper, I’ll cite you.
Alie: [laughs] Average_Pi. Oh my god, okay. I think we covered a lot. We can't cover everything. We can't
cover everything. But okay...
Aside: Patrons Skella Borealis, Daniel White, and so many others I’m just going to list the firsttime question-askers, E, Iso Partee, and Bender had questions relating to scale.
Alie: If you could measure a black hole, the average-sized black hole, how many millions of miles?
Dr. Gamble: It depends on what you’re measuring. Are you talking about the accretion disc around a black hole
or the actual size of the event horizon of a black hole?
Alie: Okay.
Dr. Gamble: If you’re measuring the size of the event horizon of a black hole which we kind of dictate that’s the
actual size of a black hole, then those are actually... they’re not as big as you think. So, say the size
of our Sun, the event horizon would actually be quite small. We’re not talking about the size of my
cup small, but we’re talking about possibly the radius of the Earth, small.
Alie: Really? 
19
Dr. Gamble: Yeah. So, the distance between the event horizon and there are other surfaces in between the
ergosphere, the very edge, where you would begin to feel the effects of gravity, and the event
horizon, where you can't fall beyond or get out of. So now, if we’re talking supermassive black hole,
the event horizon is larger than our Solar System.
Alie: Oh my god.
Dr. Gamble: It would be huge.
Alie: There is a black hole, I kid you not, there is a black hole called TON 618. TON 618 is so huge, I think
it’s about a hundred times larger than Sag A* in our galaxy.
Aside: Patrons Michael Munene, Dave Langlinais, Dtl1of1, and Valerie Bertha wanted to hear more
about this “radio-loud quasar and Lyman-alpha blob,” which is a big boy, TON618.
Dr. Gamble: So, you can think of a black hole, here comes the stupendously large again. [Alie laughs] We love
names. That’s a hundred times the mass of the center of our galaxy. That event horizon is
measured in light years.
Alie: It’s that big.
Dr. Gamble: It is huge. It is huge. If you google “TON618, event horizon size,” there are plenty of animations out
there, those zoom-out animations, it will show you the scale that this black hole is, and it makes
our Solar System look like a speck inside the event horizon.
Aside: Okay, I checked out the visuals on this meaty, meaty thing, TON 618. If TON 618 is a 150-
pound capybara, our entire Milky Way is like a small bird on its head. It’s huge!
Alie: [softly] Wow.
Dr. Gamble: That is what gives us anxiety. [laughs]
Alie: I bet... Unfathomable.
Dr. Gamble: It’s unfathomably large and it’s incredible that these things exist. It’s even more incredible that
there’s so much space in the universe for these things to exist. We don’t even know how big the
universe is!
Alie: And the universe is expanding.
Dr. Gamble: It’s accelerating.
Alie: Accelerating.
Dr. Gamble: The expansion is accelerating, yeah. So, it’s like all gas, no brakes, just zooming off into
nothingness.
Alie: What... I mean, okay. These are questions that we may never answer in our lifetime, or you may
answer in five years.
Dr. Gamble: Yeah.
Alie: I mean... Does that ever keep you working too many hours?
Dr. Gamble: It keeps me quite literally up at night and I have a wall of chalkboards in my apartment [Alie
laughs] with all these equations on there. In grad school I dreamed of equations, that’s how deep I
was in it. [laughs]
Alie: I love it.
20
Dr. Gamble: And that’s how I wrote my dissertation and did my work. I'm like, “Okay, well I had a dream, and I
moved this minus sign over to the outside and I factored this term and I integrated this. Okay, well,
what would happen if I actually do that?” And so, I would write it on the chalkboard. I was like,
[mutters] “Okay, well that doesn't look right. Well, let me change this term. I move that over there.
Let me not integrate it. See what happens... Oh, okay. Well, I get a new equation that I've never seen
before. Now I actually have to solve this thing and see if it works. “And that's how discoveries are
made. That's quite literally how Einstein did some of his work. He just sat, he sat on the train, he
rode his bike, he imagined, “What would I look like if I saw myself riding a train going by
accelerating? What would I look like if I was standing still and doing that? What would I look like if
I was on the train watching myself go by?”
Alie: So, a lot of it is imagination as well.
Dr. Gamble: These are what we call thought experiments in physics. Yes, it's imagination, but we call them
thought experiments because we're trying to experiment the logic of the physics that we're
actually trying to solve. So, we're talking philosophically, can this even, can I even imagine it? If I
can imagine it correctly, then that means I can write an equation down for it.
Alie: Ha-ha!
Dr. Gamble: Ha! Cheat codes. So yeah, I do stay up at night and I have to force myself sometimes to go to sleep.
I’m like, “Brain, turn off. Stop working.”
Alie: You’re like, “Put a pin in it, I’ll get to you tomorrow!” What’s the hardest thing about your job?
Dr. Gamble: Oh my gosh.
Alie: It can be anything.
Dr. Gamble: Gosh, I would say the hardest thing about my job is explaining new theories to old theorists.
Alie: Okay. [laughs]
Dr. Gamble: Another tie would be just explaining my science to the public. [laughs]
Alie: Well, soooorry!
Dr. Gamble: And telling them, “We don’t know yet.”
Alie: That’s exciting though!
Dr. Gamble: It’s actually pretty exciting.
Alie: It’s so exciting because we didn’t even know what germs were until recently.
Dr. Gamble: We don’t. And I gave a talk last year, this is probably one of the only schools I would probably
shout out, other than my alma mater, North Carolina A&T State University. Shout out to them. “Go
Aggies!” Sorry, have to do that. But I gave a talk at a high school last year, this time last year, I was
at a high school, St. Andrew’s, Episcopal High School in, I think it was Middleton, Delaware. They
know who they are. They're listening to this. They will probably find this episode. [Alie laughs]
Those students were phenomenal, and they asked some of the best questions I ever got but they
did not quite accept an, “I don't know.”
Alie: Ahh!
Dr. Gamble: Yeah. I was like, okay guys, we have to at some point end this. But they asked, “Okay, well if you
don't know, then why don't you don't know?” And I'm like, “Uhhh, that's a very good question. Why
don't I, don't know. How come... Hmm.” So, and I'm up on a stage and I'm giving a talk and they're,
you know, their auditorium. I'm like, “That’s a very great question. I will try to figure that out.” And 
21
so that is, that's probably the hardest part, explaining to someone why you don't know something
that they think you should know.
Alie: I have no expectations of people knowing that yet. I’m like, we are barely... [Dr. Gamble laughs]
We’ve only had the internet for like 20 years or something. Fax machines came out in the ‘80s!
Dr. Gamble: Yeah, I remember dial-up.
Alie: The fact that we know any of this is amazing.
Dr. Gamble: It’s truly amazing.
Alie: That there are brains like yours working on this, that understand this is so incomprehensible to
me. So, the idea that we know anything and even know what to look for is absolutely bonkers to
me.
Dr. Gamble: Yeah, and we write code trying to solve this too.
Alie: Yeah. I mean, just think that scientists used to have to send letters back and forth. [laughs] They’re
like, “What do you think of this?” Delivered by pony, you know.
Dr. Gamble: I’m glad we don’t deliver by pony anymore but if you go and look up some of these letters, you will
see scientists trashing each other and they will send a letter, they used to send letters, "Hey, I read
your paper. I don't agree with your terms here and I think you're wrong, but you could do better.
But add me on the next paper if you want it published. And it’ll be better.” Send. And they’ll get it
like a week or two later, they’ll read it. “No! Hawking or Planck, what are you talking about? No.
Why are you rude?” They send another letter back. And this is how they published rebuttals.
Aside: Oh, I love petty bullshit when it doesn’t involve me or this century, and apparently, the
American physicist and X-ray researcher, Dayton Miller, wrote a letter to friend and fellow
physicist, who was a photon scattering researcher, Robert Shankland. The year? 1935. And Miller
had just attended a talk at Carnegie Tech by some visiting physicist and he thought it sucked and
he wrote to his friend, “The lecture was unimpressive, and Professor Birkhoff told me that he
thought the theory is on its way out and in a few years will have been forgotten.”
The talk was titled “An Elementary Proof of the Theorem Concerning the Equivalence of Mass and
Energy,” about the theory of relativity and the speaker was, um, Einstein... Ahh!... They were wrong.
And the theory of relativity was not on its way out in a few years. What is the core lesson other
than relativity? Sweat not your haters, keep moving.
Dr. Gamble: It was a war out there. [laughs] This is how they published rebuttals. What a time to be a scientist.
Alie: Yeah. I love the idea that Twitter is nothing compared to some of these scathing private longhand
letters back and forth. [laughs]
Dr. Gamble: Oh my god, no! And some, they will get on review committees just so Einstein’s paper doesn’t get
accepted because they didn’t like it, or they didn’t like the terms they used.
Alie: Pettiness.
Dr. Gamble: Super petty. [laughs]
Alie: Okay, the best thing. The best thing about black holes. What do you love the most about them?
Dr. Gamble: Okay so, I’m probably unique in stating that, and I might be contradicting myself, but the worst
things, we’ve covered that, is what we don’t know, but also one of the best things is what we don’t
know. That’s one of the things that drew me to black holes, the mystery of black holes. We know
enough to put a couple cute equations together, we can calculate some things and get it wrong and 
22
then we can assume that we know some things. And then arrogance plays in like, "Yeah, I won a
Nobel Prize.” Okay, but we still don’t know. Do more. [laughs] Win two Nobel Prizes. [Alie laughs]
Why does something in our universe exist to the point where you can put something inside of it
and never get it back again? That simple question blows my mind. Something like that actually
exists. We have the Sun, we have Earth. Yeah, we have tangible things, yeah. But a black hole? Dark
matter? Why did... God you bein’ funny right now. [Alie laughs] What’s going on here? You just
playing games, or do you actually want us to figure this out? Because if you do we need... We need
some cheat codes, some lifelines.
Alie: [laughs] I mean just memorizing functions and math and just... I mean, you must be amazing at
Sudoku.
Dr. Gamble: I crush Sudoku.
Alie: I bet you do, I bet you do. What’s the one that my husband plays it... It’s on his iPad, it’s like...
Dr. Gamble: 2048?
Alie: Yes!
Dr. Gamble: Oh my god. [deep groan] Yes!
Alie: So, advice to people who want to try to crack the code of black holes. Any advice that you wish you
knew coming up?
Dr. Gamble: Oh man. I would say, one, if you think you know all the math, learn some more. I’m still learning
new math and I’ve been doing this for a lot of years. The other thing is, you have to stay creative.
So, one thing about studying black holes, especially if you want to go into theory, field theory
theory but mathematical theory, you have to be creative. You have to continuously think, not
outside the box but smear the edges of the box and make a circle and do it again, make a triangle,
make a hexagon, a decagon, an octagon, whatever-gon, and keep doing that and see what works.
And then remember everything that you did because there are some pieces that didn’t work then
that might work with a new theory.
Alie: Oh!
Dr. Gamble: That you tossed out before, yeah. So, that is what I’m currently going through in my work. I’m
going back to old notes that I had in grad school, which was like 10 years ago and I’m like, why did
I write this down? That was a weird idea but now it’s like, I was onto something back then! Okay,
yeah, keep doing it, keep at it.
Alie: And keep your notes.
Dr. Gamble: Oh my god, for the love of god, please keep all your notes.
Aside: Oh, do you remember I had some simmering romantic news? Turns out that Dr. Gamble
taking more chances in life led to a text to a crush, led to a now Instagram-official relationship with
Dr. Raven the Science Maven Baxter. Two supermassive science stars, emitting space lasers of
brilliance.
Dr. Gamble: I coined us the Jay-Z and Beyonce of science.
Alie: [laughs] Yes. That’s accurate. [Dr. Gamble laughs] That’s correct. Very much.
----------
So, ask the brilliant people the dimmest questions because that’s the only way to shed light on black
holes folks. You can find Dr. Ron Gamble on social media and say hi; his handles are linked in the 
23
show notes. As well as a link to The Science Haven and other episodes of ours you might like,
including Dr. Raven Baxter’s, and others on Cosmology, and aliens, and everything else.
We also have shorter episodes that are classroom friendly, those are called Smologies, and they are
linked in the show notes as well as our social media. We’re @Ologies on Instagram and Twitter, I’m
@AlieWard all over the place. To become a patron and submit your questions and maybe hear your
name, including audio questions we may play on the show, sign up at Patreon.com/Ologies. Ologies
merch, you can wear us on your body, that’s available at Ologies Merch is available at
OlogiesMerch.com.
Thank you, Erin Talbert, for adminning the Ologies Podcast Facebook group. Aveline Malek makes
our professional transcripts. The wonderful Noel Dilworth is our scheduling producer. Susan Hale is
our managing director and also does fact-checking, a little extra research. Kelly R Dwyer does the
website, Nick Thorburn wrote the theme music. And our TON 618 of editing and producing is
Mercedes Maitland of Maitland Audio.
And if you stick around until the end of the episode, I tell you a secret and right now it’s that I can
hear my alarm clock going off in the other room but it’s a gentle, lovely alarm clock and so I don’t
think it’s picking up on the microphone, but I keep hearing it and I’m like, "I know, I’m awake! I’m
awake!” So, if you hear dreamy spa music way in the background, that’s what that is. I think you
can't hear it. Anyway, berbye.
