Hello everyone and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, February 3rd, 2025, and I'm the host of the show, Dr. Cara Santa Maria. And as always, before I dive into this week's episode, I want to thank those of you who make Talk Nerdy possible. This episode is a labor of love. This episode, this whole show, is a labor of love. And I don't charge to listen to it. So for those of you who can afford to throw a little this way, you're offsetting the cost so that everybody has the opportunity to have unfettered access and listen wherever they download their podcasts. If you're interested in pledging your support, for the time being on an episodic basis, all you've got to do is visit patreon.com. Slash Talk Nerdy. And once again, if you are utilizing the app, especially on Apple, I urge you to actually kind of unsubscribe and then re-subscribe through the browser-based website, because Apple is taking a huge cut. And Patreon has had to change a lot of things because of that. Let's give a shout out to this week's top patrons. They include Anu Badavaj, Daniel Lang, David J. Eastsmith, Mary Neva, Brian Holden, David Compton, Gabrielle F. Haramio, Joe Wilkinson, Joseph Lamore, Pascuali Jalati, Rika Maharaj, and Ulrika Hagman. Thank you all so, so much. It's dark times right now. I took a vacation to Iceland during inauguration week and like really, really unplugged and detached a little bit. You'll notice that last week's episode went up. I had pre-recorded it before I left. Prior to that, we skipped a week because of the fires in Los Angeles. We had intermittent power, definitely on sort of evacuation watch. A lot of people that I know were really devastated by these fires. The sort of conventional wisdom right now is that everybody in LA knows somebody who lost everything and the city is still reeling from that. And now we're also dealing with so many unknowns, so much uncertainty at the federal level. This week, I feel like it's an interesting episode because on the one hand, we grapple sort of with some of these issues. On the other hand, it's a bit of a departure and maybe a bit of an escape for you. So I am really pleased that I had the opportunity this week to speak with Dr. Siraka Davis. She is a historian as she says it of science, art, and ideas, which I love so much. She's also an author and a speaker. She wrote her first book that she wrote Renaissance Ethnography and the Invention of the Human, won the Morris D, I think, four-cost prize for the best first book in intellectual history from the journal of the history of ideas. And it also won the Roland Age Bainton Prize in History and Theology. I love the way her mind works. And she has a new book out. It's called Humans a Monstrous History. So without any further ado, here she is, Dr. Siraka Davis. Siraka, thank you so much for joining me today. Thank you for having me. I am very excited to talk about your new book. This is your second book, if I'm not mistaken, called Humans a Monstrous History. But before we get into that, which I don't know, I feel like is very relevant right now, I would love to get to a little bit of your background. So are you, would you call yourself a historian, a historian of science and art? How do you define your... I could demigral. Pose, I would say I'm a historian of science, art and ideas, especially of science. Science, art and ideas, of course, the things that really make us human. And what a theme for this book. So tell me a little bit about what it was or what it is about monsters that drew you maybe personally, maybe academically and sort of spoke to you to say, hey, you could do an entire book about this. I think personally it started incredibly early. My earliest memories are of watching the Muppet Show. So very, very single digits years old, I don't know for, and gradually thinking, well, why isn't the actual world like this? Everybody is happy in an arctic, and pretty soon I was watching Star Trek and thinking the same thing in a slightly different way, and really appreciating that feeling of mind-blownness that the crew of the next generation felt regularly as they encountered, I don't know, beings who were actually capable of turning into slime and back, or practiced telepathy, I mean that was almost normal on Star Trek. And I guess initially I wanted to be an integral athletic explorer because too much Star Trek, and I started my BA as a theoretical physicist. But, you know, take a quantum mechanics class and you realize there will be no warp drive anytime soon. And so I, you know, half the physics cohort had a midlife crisis at 19. The ones who watched too much television, and I became a historian of science, which was actually a very easy kind of transfer where I was an undergraduate, and I became a historian of exploration, but right from the start, you know, what was that original dissertation? You know, thesis about it was about the Spaniards, you know, going to the Americas, and I think it was that those kind of first contact moments where, you know, people think about what it means to be them, which as we've seen in kind of human history, are moments where choices get made that then have very long repercussions, choices that shape law, and you know, my first book for my PhD was about how European map makers made sense of peoples of the Americas, you know, people far away where the climate is different, how different are they? When I became a college professor, one of the classes I taught was history of monsters in European thought and culture up to about 1800s, so basically the before Frankenstein, you know, cultural history. So I knew that a lot of, you know, my students who were very interested in how, you know, people tell on themselves through the stories they tell about monsters, because they're also actually stories about what people mean by human, what people are normal, and also how we feel about where an individual person ends, and everything out there beyond our skin begins, which also shapes how people act in the world, in the kinds of decisions they make about the environment or fail to make, where you see how people think about that boundary and, you know, some cultures and some individuals are happy with that being a continuum from them to, you know, other people to other beings in larger their own possibilities, but when people try to, you know, see themselves as very separate from other people, other beings, then you have to sort of disappear any, any examples that turn a continue, you know, that show that actually we live in a continuum. Absolutely. I, gosh, there's so much to unpack here, and I can't help but be reminded of an interview I did at this point of a couple of years ago, I think with a psychologist out here on the West Coast, I think, gosh, I think from Stanford, named Brian Lowry, who wrote a book about the self and how this idea of self is kind of by definition only arrived at in relation to others, that there is no self without the other, and that how we define who we are and develop that concept of self has to do with our kind of interdependence or our inter subjectivity with other individuals. And, you know, a couple of things that you pointed to, which I think I kind of want to go back to, was this early research that you were doing into exploration. And I'd love for you to share with my audience, I would say, is probably 50 to 75% American. I have a pretty English speaking audience around other parts of the globe, obviously the UK, Australia, parts of Africa, parts of other parts of Europe. But here in America, I can say that there is obviously a deeply sort of white supremacist bias even to our educational system, especially at like elementary or primary levels. And so you don't often start to contemplate the idea of kind of global exploration as colonialism and as violence until you start to become more sophisticated in your, I think, worldview. But early on, these stories are often told in the most sanitized way. They're told in a way that's celebratory. And that's very, you know, oh, these great explorers set sail to foreign lands. And then they discovered this thing that had never been discovered before. And they went in. And so this conflict, this violence, this conquest, this idea of a colonial intentionality is sort of something that I think many young people come to understand as they develop intellectually. And some people kind of never do. It's the great unnecessary myth of the age. And I say, you know, why do I say it's kind of unnecessary. It, you know, all it does is, it doesn't, it doesn't, it doesn't serve even the people who think it protects them and, you know, makes them better. And, you know, I'm drawn to a very unlikely parallel. But also a utopian one, which is somehow even more unlikely, which is the movie Monsters Inc. Okay. And which, you know, I, it was a really foundational, you know, movie for me watching it a little before I, you know, began my PhD. It's not 20 years old. And, you know, and later I would, you know, start my PhD. But, you know, humans are the monsters. We're looking at the world of, you know, called Monstropolis where every creature is sort of a cartoon monster. You know, it's a Pixar movie. And, but they think human children are toxic. Anything might happen if I think human child ends up in their world in Monstropolis. And yet monsters will go into children's bedrooms at night, scare them and collect their screens. Because that is a power on which Monstropolis runs. And so this is, you know, this is a intentionally or not. It's a metaphor for colonialism or all that kind of imperial extraction, the kind of going in and gathering something. And by the end of the movie, we learn that screams aren't as powerful as laughter. So instead of frightening the children, they could have been telling them jokes. And, and I think some of the monster making myths today, they're immensely harmful to, you know, the people who are monstrophied by stories about how they're threatening, or then they're not, you know, fully members of civil society. They don't deserve all the civil rights that quote unquote actual normal default people do. It's a tragedy because there's, there is no zero sum for being human. And, but that's what that story creates. We're on a scarce planet. But that's kind of because we are failing to actually acknowledge that. And failing to recognize that everybody is a person with an extraordinary and unique brain. There we are trying to not we, not you and I, but there are people who just want to, you know, create simulation bots to make stuff. And, you know, think, you know, the goal is to colonize Mars. And I tell you what, once there were like rich people going to space, that was it. It was like pressing a button. It was no longer one of those dream things for me. And I don't know how many other people who were one to be scientists. And astronauts, when they were, you know, eight, you know, stopped wanting to be one, once you just needed to pay money to go into out of space. But our bodies are so intertwined with the microbiome of the other beings on earth. You know, we wouldn't be us if we couldn't replenish that. That's another tragedy that, that, you know, attempt at can alienating the human being from, you know, the beings on earth instead of thinking of us as much bigger symbiotic, you know, system where we might also have responsibilities towards the beings that also nourish us. Absolutely. You know, I, I want to talk soon, but I'm, I'm going to hold off on a little bit about, I don't know, I don't want to say the fun side of this, but like about the history of sort of literature and film and poetry and, and myth and the, the monsters that have been created or developed in the human mind that have informed or influenced behavior and, and told stories. But there's sort of the other side of this conversation is exactly what we've been pointing to, which is the idea that monsters are a construct that are often used as a means of social control and social influence in, in, in an effort to either maintain power or in an effort to minimize the other, right? And we, we see this in the genocidal play, playbook. We see this. Obviously, we were, there's been a lot of talk lately about 1930s Germany. There's, you know, we've been talking about these sort of early colonial, violent excursions. And I, I can't help. When I booked this, I didn't know it would be this bad, but I can't help but bring up the elephant in the room right now, which is the last two weeks here in the United States, since our, it's so weird to even say it, since the new president was inaugurated and, and a flurry of executive orders have been written that are just following this playbook to a T, this idea of dehumanizing, minimizing the other in an effort to, to paint them as subhuman, paint them as separate. And when something is subhuman, it's much easier to commit violence against them to strip them of their rights. And, and I'm just curious as you've been watching from across the pond and, and you have so much expertise in this area, you know, what has your experience been sort of watching the news? Let's just say I watch rather less of it in the last two weeks than I usually do, but it is eerily familiar. The parallels that many people have been drawing have been with with Nazi Germany, where, you know, trans people, you know, disabled people, you know, groups who have been seen as kind of ethnic minorities against whom, monsterifying stories have been circulating for some time, or being, you know, reframed as threats to be disappeared in one way or another, whether that's on in detention centers or by deciding they don't exist, because suddenly, you know, we're going to, you know, pretend that humanity lives into genders when that has never, ever been the case, there has always been the continuum. And of course, attacking birthright citizenship, again, is, is a kind of way of separating, passing out citizens and deciding that some of them aren't actually straightforward citizens and pushing them towards a complete non-citizen status. So if they're that, you can almost kind of, for me, it's, it's, it's kind of almost visible, you can see where the kind of blurry edges between citizens of the United States and people who are citizens of other countries, people are being pushed to that margin and kind of corralled there almost to kind of create a kind of border that's, that's almost this demilitarized zone, you know, between, say, the US and Latin America demilitarized zone that's been in people's minds populated with people who are, you know, labeled as, as, you know, quote-unquote, illegal immigrants. But, you know, when you think about the fact that so many undocumented people in the US can of millions and millions pay taxes and they have jobs. So jobs exist, but the categories that allow, you know, these people to actually become naturalized citizens, you know, those, those parts are are very difficult and limited. But when you think, you know, going back to what you were saying earlier about, about, you know, the colonization of what became the United States by people from Europe, those, those stories are not about illegitimate land grabs. It's, it's not about the enslavement and genocide of Native Americans. It's, it's not about Africans, you know, kidnapped. And, and, but if you think about what US citizenship even is, you know, what is that, what is it built on, what is, what is that nation built on? And then you can see the, the, the houses of cards built on the sand of declaring that, you know, some people who came in shicks from Europe discovered this continent. And what I, what I used to say to my students is, well, you know, Columbus didn't discover the new world. There were people already there who got their first. Well, maybe it was the Patagonians, you know, the people who got all the way down to the south of, you know, South America, you know, most of, you know, most people in, the first people in, the Americas, you know, came, you know, across that land bridge, not all, you know, there was some ships and, you know, I'm not your artist. But these are stories that people tell about what nations are legitimate and what powers they are morally entitled to wield. But we as a, as a, as a, as a species need to, you know, be willing to think about what the evidence actually is and not what we think would be convenient. And, you know, none of us were alive in a whole lot of horrible stuff was happening. But we are alive now to think about what we permit, what stories we tell as well. Absolutely. And I think maybe it would benefit us to sort of go back a little bit and dive into the, I guess the connection, the parallel that you make in the book. And such a beautiful example is simply the cover. I'm not sure if the, if the American version of the book is the same as the UK version. It is. Okay. Good. Yeah. So it's, you know, humans, a monstrous history. And the cover is, uh, is a mirror. Right. It's, it's you looking yourself in, in the face. And then of course, the mirror is surrounded. It has this beautiful frame around it with all of these kind of archetypes of, of monsters from film and literature. And so this core argument that you may, we've sort of took it for granted. I think in Dove in very deep, but talk to me a little bit about this core argument about the, the monsters that we create and what they tell us about ourselves. One of the things I say is, that there are no monsters, but all of them are real. And we start with all of them are real parts. Monster is a, is a, is a label. It's a label for things that don't fit categories. In the moment, you have a classification system for, you know, things out there in the world. You know, anything that doesn't fit your bunch of categories is a category breaker or a monster. And this book is about, you know, the monsters at the edge of the category of the human. And, you know, I would argue that the idea of the human has never been universal. It's always been contested. And it's always been changing. And so if we trace, you know, that line of, of, you know, where the boundary was between human and all of those edges, because it's always been relational, we can actually see monsters in the foundations of, you know, all sorts of kind of laws and our urgent questions today about labor and gender and, you know, the legacies of colonialism and our relationship to the ecology. They're all built on a foundation of how we understand the boundaries between different kinds of human groups and between humans and the non-human. When we, when we talk about specific monsters, I suppose, because obviously I think we could find examples of this, but I'm wondering, is it, is it the norm or is it the exception that the invention of a monster is an intentional expose of sort of human foibles? Do you think that most authors or even early, you know, storytellers, back when we had these stories in the oral tradition, that these inventions of monsters were intentionally created to as sort of a warning or as a reflection of our own, I don't know, our own foibles, or do you think that they evolved in that way? There's an enormous kind of variety of settings and purposes that monsters early sources can observe and some of them are just kind of people trying to understand what they're seeing in the world and, you know, what they're identifying as not being normal. So, you know, the ancient Greeks talked about monstrous births, so kind of individual births of people or animals that were very strange, like, say, a two-headed calf, and they thought they might just be the, you know, accidents of nature or they might be signs, divine signs of some punishment to come or actually be a punishment. But they also thought that, you know, human bodies in mind were malleable and they would be affected by, you know, by the kind of geography, the climate you lived under, what you ate and did. And so, in distant places where the climate was harsh, theoretically, you could get to places where the people were denatured, they had been monstrophied into what were called monstrous people. So, they were all eaters of human flesh, or they were all apple-smellers, you know, who didn't eat, but simply, you know, consume smells, you know, because of their climate. And so, what that kind of, and that was a kind of like a scientific way of explaining the variety of beings in nature, it was on the one hand, you defined norms by saying just where they ended. But you were also, it was also a kind of way of defining, potentially defining excellence and that word prodigy, which used to be an extraordinary birth that might have some deep meaning, has retained today that sense of excellence. And so, here's the thing, as you become more and more different as, say, a performer, there comes a point when you may be so good that you've really almost broken the category of the normal athlete, or the normal pianists, shall we say. And so, you have these kind of observations that people then tell stories about as to the kind of invented ones, I mean, if we can move, confords in time a bit to, to kind of stories we, you know, we know a little bit more about, I mean, they, there are kind of utopian kind of missions behind, you know, it's kind of huge, you know, cultural franchises like Star Trek when it began, go back a few hundred years to the 17th century, this English aristocrat Lady Margaret Cavendish wrote a sci-fi novel. So, then she was in the mid-17th century, she didn't get to do all the stuff she wanted to do, she, she was self-taught, she, she published poetry, scientific writings, satires, a play or two, and she wrote a novel in which a woman who is kidnapped and taken off in a ship ends up, you know, this ship is blown off course, I think, ends up at the North Pole where this earth touches another, everybody who kidnapped her kind of dies of the cold, was really convenient. And then she walks off the ship and meets these, you know, people in this other earth who are actually animals who, you know, stand on their hind legs and speak, you know, not English, but they speak. And so, what, what's striking about her imagined, you know, world of these animals who behave like, like humans and, you know, they have, you know, kingdoms and they have, there's a court and they just happen to be, you know, bears and geese and, and beavers and whatnot. You know, she's, she couldn't imagine a place on this earth where her skills could be, would be fully respected. And so she imagined an earth where the beings were not even people. So it really was a, a kind of way of imagining a better world for people like her by kind of pushing her way out of seeing society as being one populated with regular people, you know, she was living in animal land, was almost the muppet show before the markets. Yeah, it's interesting to see kind of two sides of that, of that utilization or that, that fantastic creation of, of these monsters, right? We often think of monsters having this quite negative valence, but you've described so many examples even, even to this point in the, in the conversation of monsters as ideals or monsters as friends or monsters as sort of a retreat or protective opportunity. I think about, oh gosh, the Guillermo del Pans Labyrinth film. Yes. And, and the thing that I love so much about this is that it's never quite made clear if this is all an invention of her mind to escape sort of the, the treachery of war or if this is a fantasy film in which like all these things are real, you know, I like, I prefer the first explanation, but some people prefer the second. I would love maybe to, to talk for a moment about something that you brought up in that description of Cavendish, which is the Anomalia, the sort of, when we think about monsters, they are a reflection of our, of our humanity. But, and when we think about the idea of in-group and out-group and self-in-other, we often grapple with this concept of like somehow the human is separate from the animal, but obviously we know scientifically we are animals. And so I'm curious about, I'm sure you've grappled with this topic quite a bit of our relationship to animals and the animals' relationship to our sort of invention or creation of monsters. I rather like the dilemma with, with, with apes and, you know, where, where does kind of human end, where does, the kind of simian world begin? And in early Christian thought there was a hierarchy of beings from the lowliest up to the humans and they could proceed in steps. And, you know, the kind of apes were just below us. But, you know, individual people, if they were badly behaved enough, they could kind of like slip backwards as if being a, like kind of a full human was also partly a spiritual and moral contract. So, there was something in a conditional about it. Beings arranged in a chain with nice, separate links, you know, but there was always this possibility that you could, you could slip back into the poor relations, the beings who were as close to but not fully sentient. And in the, kind of 1670 centuries, you have European naturalists, you know, running, you know, experiments and writing treatises about how, you know, humans are separate from, from apes. And there's a kind of wonderful account of the diorists Samuel Peaks in the 17th centuries. He essentially, he writes about rushing off to the docks in London because he's just heard of an extraordinary creature called the Baboon that had been brought on a ship from West Africa. And he heard, you know, from, you know, the ship's captain that there's a whole species of this extraordinary being, this extraordinary kind of simian in Africa. But for Peaks, it's kind of unimaginable. He thinks this has got to be a creature that's half human and half Baboon. So, he says, he's a monster god of a man and a sheep of a boon. And so he's okay with a one-off human animal hybrid, which is the opposite of how we would be today. It's interesting how often you do see this in in classic literature, these, and sometimes they're, they're presented as terrifying, and other times they're presented as like superhuman, right? As these like mystical beings that are, you know, part, part man, part beast, and they have these really cool powers, and there's something that we almost like revere and aspire to. Yeah. And of course, he, I mean, he's, he's fine with the idea of actual human animal hybrid because this would then be a one-off extraordinary being a monster. Whereas if this were a normal species, then the gap between humanity and the next closest, you know, ape species would be smaller, right? And that's threatening to our superiority. Because, you know, those steps on that great chain of being have suddenly become smaller. But of course, you know, so that's like a macro example of, of, you know, of how people have thought about the boundaries between the human and the animal. But at the micro level, we now think about the human being almost as a, where this giant like piece of luggage in which, you know, a host of kind of bacteria live, you know, inside us on our skin. They tweak our temperaments, our moods, you know, what we want to eat. And so the very idea that of me saying, I'm an I, rather than a we is simply a story, we tell ourselves. And so if we think of like human beings as being like each one of us is a one, within that kind of logic, what we actually are, which is this microbiome with a big animal around it, well, that's, that's mind blowing. I mean, that's like each one of us is a ball cube. If your job at a healthcare facility includes disinfecting against viruses, you know, prevention is the best medicine and maintaining healthy spaces starts with a healthy cleaning routine. Granger's world class supply chain helps ensure you have the quality products you need when you need them, from disinfectants and cleaning supplies to personal protective equipment. So you can help deliver a clean bill of health, call 1-800-GRANJER-CLICK-RANJER.COM or just stop by, Granger, for the ones who get it done. If your job at a healthcare facility includes disinfecting against viruses, you know prevention is the best medicine and maintaining healthy spaces starts with a healthy cleaning routine. Granger's world class supply chain helps ensure you have the quality products you need when you need them, from disinfectants and cleaning supplies to personal protective equipment so you can help deliver a clean bill of health, call 1-800-GRANJER-CLICK-RANJER.COM or just stop by, Granger, for the ones who get it done. I don't know why we're not having this conversation more, I suppose. This conversation of the fantastic as a stand-in or as a metaphor, as an allegory, for many of these, I don't want to call them mundane, but these fundamentally human and like really existential grappelings that we have within ourselves, within our communities, within our kind of global positioning of ourselves. One thing that came up for me, and I don't know if you touched on this, and I'm curious, I'm curious if it's something that you're even interested in discussing, is the phenomenon in which certain people truly believe in monsters, like that there's actually the mythology and the lore become so intertwined in the cultural narrative that there are people who believe that there actually are these mythical creatures, that these examples of human whatever extremes serve, I guess, as cultural warnings or cultural guardrails, and they become so imbued that individuals truly believe that there is a monster in that lock, or that there are these elves that will do things at night to make sure that tourists don't slip on the moss, or whatever the case may be. The press that certain people believe in monsters, well, what do we mean by monsters? I mean, I want to say potato potato, because modern science has monsters all the time, and they're called new discoveries, oh, a new species. So there's different kinds of language for referring to category breakers. Then are always called, you know, monster, or like the equivalent term, say, in a European language, in the West, they may be called something like monster, or, you know, in science, we say new discovery, and that is basically a life form that is not in the book, and this is what? You know, a few hundred years ago, the same, you know, scientists in the same places would have called a monster. So there's that kind of thing where there are just other words, and sometimes kind of with a charge, you know, the word kind of blue stocking, was, you know, a pejorative way to refer to a woman, you know, wanting rights and independences that were developed to her, a century ago. For example, but just to come down to the more, you know, straightforward, you know, monster theories like the Loch Ness monster, or you know, there is this field of cryptozoology, which is, you know, the search for those kind of, for the monsters that are there, but haven't been truly found and proved proven. And you know, I, you know, I'm not a psychologist, isn't it me, more, really more, you're a real real house, but searching for things that haven't yet been found, there's, it involves hope. It involves, and it may be all kinds of different hopes are pinned on a being so that, you know, you have a way of feeling that at least someone is in control of some aspect of your interest that you cannot, whether that's kind of elves who will, you know, play some limits on, you know, the actions of tourists or, you know, beings who will kind of watch over people on my kind of glumia days I will consider when are the Vulcans going to come and like fix everything and like shelter the bad people. And that is a kind of the same thing, you know, this is what, you know, someone without a spiritual bone in her body, you know, will sort of roll her eyes and like, wonder why, you know, we are living in some ridiculous simulation of some, some, you know, much more intelligent and powerful species and kind of irritatingly, you know, demand that she's taken out of the tank. And I wonder whether this is about, you know, people as storytellers, people are in seem to kind of seem to instinctively organize things into groups. And this is how we process stuff, you know, we were little mammals, you know, in the forests and looking out and needed to figure out what berries you can eat without being poisoned and, you know, very quickly classify, you know, the threats when, you know, we were not the biggest thing out there. And I wonder whether that is a form of storytelling that is a way to deal with all of the unknowns, many of which are scary and seem like these big looming things. And, you know, maybe there's a big looming thing that's on your side, you know, in your gang. It is fascinating the many, I don't, uses, I don't know if that's quite the right word, but the utility of monsters throughout human history, that these, whether they were intentional inventions to sort of a specific purpose or whether they evolved through chatter and meaning making of sort of natural phenomena, that these beings, these creatures, these beasts, these hybrids, these forms, served and continue to sort of so many purposes to humanity, you know, and really that does bring us back to that idea of the human as that, as that center, that the human perspective, that sort of we are all the, you know, main character in our own play, that these monsters either are, you know, serve as warnings to keep us out of danger or they serve as, as you mentioned, sources of hope that maybe something will come to save us from this chaos or to save us from death or to save us from, you know, suffering, or that they serve to justify violence and bigotry that, you know, human is not really human, this human is subhuman and more like a monster and therefore it's okay for me to treat them, you know, in a way that violates their, their, their civil rights. It's fascinating how many roles monsters have played throughout human history. Are we leaving any out that you've stumbled upon in your, in your kind of scholarship, other purposes, I guess we could say? I was thinking also about, about kind of gods because so often, you know, you know, stories about gods and humans involved, humans being made out of gods, in a gods image or gods themselves, you know, give birth to various kinds of beings and of course if the child is different from the parent, technically the child is a monster, it's broken the category and become something else. So kind of monstrosity is, kind of built into the way, kind of some kind of divinities even imagined. And I guess, you know, we've talked about the kind of human boundary with ecology and animals and, you know, across types of humanity. And then there's also kind of machines which are, you know, a kind of monster type for our age. Because now it's, it's kind of all humans are, you know, being framed as, you know, are necessary because machines are supposedly going to do the work. Where then the consumers are supposed to come from, I know not. Yeah, I mean, it is a whole other category that I never really thought to relate to this idea of a monster, but it checks so many of those boxes for sure. And I guess one more comes up for me and I do think it's related, it's not completely separate, but we talk about this monsterification of the other of the outgroup. But there have been these historical examples and, you know, with through modern science, we've been able to explain many of the modern medical science, but of human beings themselves with genetic anomalies, with, you know, what we call, teratogens by definition, that word teratogen, right? Monster forming, that's what it actually translates to that a mother during pregnancy might imbibe some sort of toxin accidentally and it causes some sort of anomaly to the fetus. And then when, when that child is born or still born sadly, that there is something monstrous quote unquote about it, either like Annansephaly, it's lacking a cortex, a brain, and so its head looks very, very strange, where it has webbed feet or, you know, there's so many examples throughout human history. And I'm curious about some of your scholarship there if you've dug deep into the idea of the human monster. Yeah, there were some extraordinary to us explanations for kind of individual, you know, children being born with, you know, atypical bodies and one was that monstrous births were caused by the mother's imagination. So, it's probably always mom's fault, always. So the idea was that mothers kind of, you know, mother could imagine things or fantasize about people and that would make her, you know, unborn child, you look like them. Equally, if you frightened a mother by showing her, you know, a portrait of a monkey or in one case, there was a woman who went to Lennon or Market in London and was frightened by a lobster and gave birth to a lobster child. Oh god. So yeah, this, this connection from the mother's mind to the child's body is, of course, happening at a time when paternity couldn't be tested. This is centuries before genetic testing. So there's a kind of would have been an anxiety potentially around a child who didn't resemble the father, but maybe resemble it someone else in the community. And so, you know, you could, you know, make the argument back then that the mother might have committed adultery in the mind even if she hadn't actually done it with body. And that's why the child looked the way they did. So that was, that was one possibility. Another possibility was that God was sending a sign, but then the thing is, well, how do you read the sign? And you know, these monsters don't arrive with a tag, with a tag attached. So, you know, people would try to evaluate from how they felt about them, what the monster meant. You know, whether this was just an accident because sometimes nature makes a mistake or plays a joke, whether the mother had just had an unfortunate, you know, accident or, you know, whether, you know, this was a sign or a punishment. And so, when you see those, you know, people, you know, fighting over those explanations, we, you know, we see that today as well, you know, what caused the floods in some place, you know, is it, is it climate change or did, does someone control the weather? I mean, some of these, in stories are, you know, nothing more or less than lies. And, you know, we have to kind of be, be, be, be ready for that in the, in the past as well, without kind of assuming that every testimony that is strange is simply somebody foolish or somebody lying. And then that's the great challenge. Well, and I can imagine that a challenge that maybe has come up for you. And I would love sort of, unless there's something that we've missed, I'd love for sort of as a, as a closing contemplation to, to discuss a little bit with you this concept of our relationship to monsters and our personal awareness of the human relationship to monsters. So I say that in the context of, you know, reading your book, looking at the, the, the connections that you make, it's so fundamentally important to not ignore and to really grapple with our historical and our present cultural, individual, but also cultural relationship with monsters because it does affect or it is an effect of how we relate to our fellow human beings. And, and so many people probably haven't even taken the time to dig deep and in doing so, really do a lot of kind of self work and, and introspection. And then on the flip side of that, here you are as an academic scholar, but also personally digging into this on a regular basis. And I know what it is to be steeped in a topic. And so I'm curious from your perspective, like, do you see monsters everywhere? Like how, how do you now go through life with this, with this frame? And how does it continue to affect you? I do see monsters everywhere, but, you know, the word monster for me is very capacious. It just means category breaker. It means exception to the rule. So, so what I, what I'm seeing is storytelling about what categories are normal and expected. And so I guess I'm often seeing, you know, sets of categories that are incomplete because it's where things are incomplete that people then instead of saying, oh, whoops, we forgot something, you know, they can either make that decision, oh, like we need to make some more boxes or decide there's something wrong with you, you don't fit the boxes or decide, well, why do we need boxes? We live in a continuum. So I guess I do look around and see stories that are made, you know, around, for example, reparations for slavery or or, you know, just the structure of third world debt when you consider, you know, how much of in a Europe was built with the labor and the resources from the so-called third world. And so I feel like there are stories built into some, you know, fundamental, you know, international organizations that are, you know, about papering over forms of monsterification in the past and somehow continuing to benefit from them. But I also feel as if you know, the alternative, better ways of thinking about difference are out there in in fiction, there's, you know, whether it's, you know, utopian sci-fi or children's television, that is also very striking, you know, the things people, people make for genuinely for children, they seem to kind of find their best selves and those shows manage to get greenlit. So it's almost as if people know how they should behave, but a combination of, you know, greed, circumstances, ego, you know, structural problems, I mean, they don't behave that way as often as they should. I love that during that explanation, you used that word that you've used a couple of times so far, monsterification. I think that even just including that in our vocabulary changes the way I would love to see that. Yeah, yeah, monsterification. And then, you know, in a future in which, you know, everyone is wondrous and unique and in a monster, seem a good way, no one would be a monster. So that's a kind of monster of futurism, a better way to be. Oh, I love it. On that note, I just want to thank you for spending time with us today for your scholarship for putting these these fascinating ideas into the written word so that we could all enjoy them. And for sharing some of these these concepts with us for, for I think further grappling, it's been, it's been a lovely conversation. Oh, thank you. It's been a pleasure. Thanks for having me on. Absolutely. Everybody, the book is Humans a Monstrous History by Dr. Siraka Davis. And everybody listening, thank you for coming back a week after week. I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk to you.
