Hello, everyone, and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, January 6, 2025. And I'm the host of the show, Dr. Cara Santa Maria. It's a new year, and we've got a new season for you, starting out strong with an incredible individual that we're really, really honored to have had the opportunity to chat with. But before we dive into this week's episode, I want to thank those of you who make Talk Nerdy possible as we enter into our 11th year. What? Yeah, we started this show in 2014. Today, this is episode 533. And the patrons, I just can't thank you enough. Obviously, the show is free. Nobody pays for it. Nobody has to pay for it. You can just download it through any app that you want to listen to. So those of you who take the time and have the financial capability to support the show the way that you do, I'm just like so incredibly grateful. You don't have to do it. You do it out of the goodness of your heart. And you make it so that we can keep this thing going. You help me by paying both my incredible producer and assistant, Noel Dilworth and also the editing company that I work with and also help me carve out the time in my really busy schedule because I am now working as a psychology fellow soon to be, hopefully, fingers crossed, fully licensed psychologist. And so yeah, I'd like to be able to keep doing this and you make it possible. So thank you for that. If you'd like to pledge your support on an episodic basis, all you've got to do is visit patreon.com slash talk nerdy. This week's top patrons include a new bot of adj Daniel Lang David J. Smith, Mary Niva, Brian Holden, David Compton, Gabrielle F. Haramio, Joe Wilkinson, Joseph Lamore, Pascuali Jalati, Rika Maharaj and Ulrika Hagman. All right, so let's get into it. I had the opportunity to speak with a giant in her field. Dr. Judith L. Herman is a professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School. She's also the recipient of the Lifetime Achievement Award from the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies. And she's a distinguished life fellow of the American Psychiatric Association. You may have read, if you are a student of psychology or psychiatry and you've done any sort of specialization in trauma or PTSD, you've likely read her her just incredibly important book trauma and recovery, the aftermath of violence from domestic abuse to political terror. But she now has a new book out. It's called truth and repair how trauma survivors envision justice. So without any further ado, here she is. Dr. Judith L. Herman. Well, Judith, thank you so much for joining me today. My pleasure. And thanks for braving all of our tech issues. I'm glad we worked it out because I'm so excited to talk to you about your new book, Truth and Repair, How Trauma Survivors and Vision Justice. And you know, my podcast, I am a psychologist, but my podcast didn't start as a psychology podcast, and I only really cover these topics periodically. Listeners maybe didn't study psychology or psychiatry and they may not know that you are the expert on trauma. I mean, you wrote the book that every student reads trauma and recovery. And so it really is a boon to have you here with us today. Well, thank you for having me. So I'd love to talk a little bit first about the transition, you know, kind of what was it that brought you to want to write the new book? Did you feel like there was more research? Did you feel like there were just things that you really hadn't been able to say back when you first wrote trauma and recovery? What made you say, okay, I have a whole new volume here. Well, actually, the book was a long time sitting on the back shelf. I first started working on it around 2000, which was just maybe 10 years after trauma and recovery. I think the unfinished business, if you will, in trauma and recovery was that I had argued in that book that trauma isn't just a personal psychological problem. It's a social and political problem. Because the violence is the interpersonal violence that causes trauma is a crime, or at least nominally, a crime. And that's not just an individual matter. That's a matter for the whole society to deal with. Yeah. But then the stages of right recovery that I outlined in that book were about individual healing, starting with safety in the present and then doing the work of processing the trauma and integrating the trauma story into a life narrative so that it's not the whole story of one's life. It's one of the chapters in one's life story. Yeah. And then kind of re-focusing on the present and future from a more proactive stance in the third stage of recovery. But that left on resolve the matter of social justice. And so the question was, can you, would there be a final stage of recovery that involves seeking justice? And so what I did was I went back to the experts who are the survivors. And I interviewed 30 survivors of gender violence, 26 women and four men. And I asked them, if you could write the script, everything come out your way. What would make things right for you, or as right as possible? And so the new book is about what they told me. And you would think it would be an obvious question to ask, but in fact nobody had ever bothered to ask it. And I chose gender violence because it's what I know best in terms of the patience I've worked with all my life. And me, it's the most common human rights violation in the world, according to United Nations. But I would argue that the same principles could be applied to any situation where the dominance of one group over another is deeply embedded in the culture. That's dominance based on race or gender or religion or cast or social class because when the society accepts and normalizes and rationalizes and excuses the violence of the dominant group, which is the ultimate tool to keep the subordinate group subordinate and you don't then you can't have justice. You know, so much comes up for me as you mentioned this, the way that this structure is recapitulated so often in any sort of dominant group. And we see this when we look at sort of models of racial identity development or different models within the psychology literature of sort of that last stage being a movement towards social justice, a movement towards civil action and collective action. Then very often that is kind of the maybe like Maslow might have even if he was thinking along these terms called that sort of a self-actualization. But I really want to take a moment to just focus on the point that you made at the very end there, which is the the normalization especially of gendered violence that is so pernicious and so you ubiquitous as to not even seem present to many people that often we talk about let's say mass shootings and we forget to talk about the fact that the number one predictor is gender. So assumed that the mass shooter is male that we just we just move right past that. Right. The acceptance of male violence is a normalized masculine trait basically. Uh is so widespread it's not even really conscious. It's just that's the way things are. Right. And and sadly there's nothing essentialist about maleness. There's nothing fundamental about being a man that means a man must be violent. This is this is not because the culture reinforces it. Yeah. My mother was a psychologist of the researcher and psychoanalyst. Her name was Helen Valkluis and she wrote a book called Psychic War in Men and Women and she talked about how the affectionate bonding of children to parents happens with both sexes. That's the socialization uh that we impose on kids requires men to be disposable warriors and women to be inferior child bearers and it creates insoluble moral conflicts for both sexes because if men are supposed to be aggressive but that violates their affectionate nature that creates guilt which is and men are more prone to guilt and shame and for women having their affectionate nature be considered in a train of inferiority creates shame and women are more shame prone than men. And more towards guilt and women more towards shame that's interesting. Yeah. You know there's there's this great documentary that I've cited a million times on the podcast so far called The Mask You Live In by Jennifer Sebel Newsom that talk about young boys and how society how we collectively influence young boys and you know as they develop what that translates to in manhood and one of the big takeaways is that as a culture we have feminized every emotion other than anger or violence right. Exactly. And yeah, feminizing it we have made it less than or we have something that men do not want to be associated with and then therefore they're constantly having to perform their masculinity. So foster to each other and sadly you know it may be the case that sometimes overtly violent acts are posturing and they are performative but very often it's likely that these violent acts are a function of not having any other tools right like why do men so often commit violent acts. Well and also to impress other men one of the people I interviewed for the book this was psychologist at North Western who ran a preventive education program for both for the young men in college was called Mars which stood for masculinity, allyship and something something and he had this exercise that he called the manbox and he had the guys he would he would write on the blackboard all the words that they associated with masculinity being a real man and he said you know the words were always the same. It's read me, drink thoughts of beer, has sex with lots of women, tough, aggressive, stoical, never show sphere, never show and he said the word loving was never mentioned and then he would put on the board he would with chalk he draw a box around these words which he called the manbox then he said what happens if you step outside the manbox what words do associate with that and those words were also always the same. Bitch pussy you know, whimped and so then he would say well I guess where boxed in here aren't we. And he said the guys really could relate to it they also but they also needed they also needed emotional literacy they didn't know had name emotions if you ask them how they were feel you know what they were feeling they would say okay. Yeah it's not a lot of therapy it's either fine or it's tired or it's hungry but it's very very complex like I'm feeling overwhelmed. I'm sure I'm feeling melancholy or I'm feeling anxious or on edge like that's yeah that's rare. Yeah so um but he said you know they would train peer educators and then the guy the peer educators would go and do programs with sports teams and frats and and you know the the guys would listen. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And it ended up giving them a sense that they too had a stake in gender equality. Oh absolutely I don't know how many people if if it's really made explicit want to have these struggles I think from people it's just so implicit as to not even recognize that it is a struggle and I would point for the listeners to a brilliant older book so you know even even the way it's written has its problems with like gendered language but Aaron Beck's prisoners of hate and I myself I'm not like a very CBT oriented, a cognitive behaviorally oriented practitioner I'm very very existential but I think that there is a lot of good in those kinds of writings about how we move to this place but of course that's not so much what you focus on it's not the violence perpetrated by these men it's the victimization of that violence and how a person who has experienced whether it be a genocide, a rape, a trauma, a political terror or a domestic assault or you know any form of gendered violence and beyond what do we do with that how do we how do we I guess foster resilience how do we live life after we've been victimized by somebody in a way that makes life feel like it may not be worth living well the consequences of trauma are shame and isolation and the healing involves empowerment and connection with other people and that's why the justice issue turned out to be so dependent on the actions of the bystanders what what we heard what I heard from the people I interviewed was that they didn't care that much about perpetrators they weren't terribly focused on punishment they also were not focused on forgiveness they wanted acknowledgement apology and the mans and they wanted them from the bystanders even more than they wanted them from the perpetrators it makes so much sense I mean when we and it's just not reinforced in our media narrative right when we watch films even when we watch television coverage of active trials so much of the narrative is about retribution or about admonition or about you know getting the the perpetrator there do that's always such a heavy heavy theme but you're right when I actually dig in and I hear these stories we saw a lot during the me two movement the empowerment was when the individuals stood up and and read their victim statements when they guess together when they felt like he's scared about them and that their voices were heard absolutely absolutely no our justice system which is a retributive justice system is all about perpetrator a victim is simply a witness the victim has no standing basically in court other than as a witness I sometimes say that if one wanted to actually intentionally design a venue that would be guaranteed to aggravate the symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder a criminal court would be ideal right it's not some sort of like it is a passive you know outcome but it it feels almost intentional right that these that way that these court proceedings are really deeply retraumatized individuals and very often put the blame at the feet of the individuals like that's what the defense strategy is very often is to figure out how to make the jury think as she was asking for it well right because I mean it's an adversarial system where blaming the victim is you know the sort of default strategy for the defense took a course at the American psychiatric association and no meeting from a well-known forensics psychiatrist on how to be an expert witness in court the very first slide he put up at the beginning of the day was a picture of the hat fields and the McCoy's these fierce-looking mountain men would they're right you know their rifles across their knees and he said why do we have courts you may think we have courts to meet out justice or to determine the truth he said actually the real reason we have courts is to resolve disputes without firearms he said but short of physical attack and these sort of hostile encounter any any sort of hostile attack is allowed and so he was preparing us as expert witness as expert witnesses said you you better be prepared to be shamed and humiliated and have your credibility and your credentials and your you know and if attacked and if you have any skeletons in your closet forget it because they'll dig them out you know and with all the privileges that we had coming in as expert witnesses as professionals can you imagine what a you know a rape victim or an insus victim is going to go through oh absolutely yeah as somebody who's afraid of retaliation potentially afraid of men in you know powerful authoritarian positions who doesn't understand the court system like a layer of maybe somebody doesn't have an education or maybe English is not somebody's first language or maybe the same the me you know financial support or any social support I it's no wonder that for many many women and trans men and gender minorities they just don't report they just would rather stay silent than open the whole can of worms and that is a sad no I mean maybe 20% of rape is getting courted I mean no you're also getting away with it are pretty much 95 plus percent one of the male survivors I interviewed is a man named Ross Chike who has a law degree and his professor at Brown he's one of the people who had delayed recall of childhood abuse he'd been abused by the choir director and a voice choir when he was a kid and when he recovered the memories in later life he reached out to other you know alumni of the choir and sure enough the guy had been a serial perpetrator and they actually did file a criminal complaint but it was too late for that because the statute of limitations had run so they filed a simple complaint against the perpetrator and against the central fiscal boys choir the perpetrator defaulted he left the state acquired ultimately came to a negotiated settlement that when he got the first response from the choir's attorneys you know they they wanted you know they just offered money in a non-disclosure agreement and he said no way you know we wanted admission and apology to all the victims and we want all the victims notified and they couldn't make sense out of the fact that what he did the most important thing to him was the public acknowledgement but his and he said when they first came back and you know basically saying something like if you were harmed you know you regret if you were harmed what do you mean if his wife said she thought the fact that he was a white educated man with a law degree who was prepared to play hardball ended up getting you know he got the settlement he wanted but that's a very rare yeah I'm sure that had something to do with it and it's amazing that they wouldn't understand it's not just about public acknowledgement yes the public and acknowledging matters for the person armed but public acknowledgement is the first step of exactly you can't change something if you can't admit that it even happened and so the organization can stand up and say we regret that this happened we were unaware of it at the time but that means that we did not have policies in place that protected our youth and we are changing our ways to exactly right we need that well and not only acknowledge that effects but acknowledgement of power and acknowledgement that it was wrong otherwise it's just oh well you know it's over why don't we just let bygones be bygones you know that's why this still happens all the time yeah yeah get over it and you mentioned something earlier that I think bears repeating which is that the bystanders have a role here and they need to be called to task we think about the Weinstein situations we think about these kind of high profile cases where it's like how would this have happened to so many people because there's a culture of silence of looking the other way of allowing it to happen thank you you have the enablers people who are actually complicit and then you have all the people who say well it's none of my business and you know it's private matter I don't want to get involved and that hurt for the survivors that the trail often hurts worse than the actual prone to the perpetrator oh absolutely because very often these bystanders it's it's almost a misnomer to call them bystanders because very often they're people in positions of inordinate power that if they had just said something one time right right a whole you know house of cards would have come down yeah yeah how devastating to think about the experiences of so many individuals where there was systematic abuse yeah okay you know an entire childhood or an entire lifetime or entire working relationship I saw the devastating consequences of this so often when I worked in the foster care system yeah to the extent that girls I worked specifically with girls that were between the ages of 13 and 18 these were girls living in group homes that were very likely not going to get adopted so they were going to age out of the system many of them were dual diagnosis so they had mental health issues and substance use issues of course they were obviously the majority of them were victims I always assumed a sexual violence instead of assuming no sexual violence I you know it was like yeah assume it until proven otherwise but very often I would see that these young girls were actively being trafficked and just not even have the language you know in their view it was their choice this was somebody that was you know helping them and taking care of them and sometimes I love them and I'm not a victim this is helping me get by and that's it's yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah I mean I'm a data on that matter you know abused kids are two to four times as likely re-victimized as teens or adults either with sexual assaults, sex trafficking, domestic violence, sexual harassment I mean it's like they have a big fat target on their backs and I'm very lucky that I live in a very progressive state I live in California the laws are more progressive here than in most states you know we do see big changes even within the LAPD working towards identifying these children as victims but there are still places right now in this country that will call a 15-year-old trafficked victim a prostitute. One of the other people I interviewed for the book was this amazing judge in New York named Fernanda Camacho and he he had organized a diversion court for trafficked kids because he got tired of seeing the same kids in his court yeah over and over and over being brought in you know in sentence to you know either the pimple would bail them out or they would be sentenced to you know 30 days in jail and he realized they wait a minute these kids are the same age as my teenage daughter and so he he set up this diversion court it's become a model for the country now he's all in favor of the the Nordic model with the the pimps and the jumps should be criminalized but not the people who are being prostitute. Absolutely yeah I mean and we do see this we see these kinds of changes at the level of our justice system but it moves very very slowly and it is doing exactly what you have done as a researcher and as a clinician which is talking to the very people who have experienced it themselves asking them when did you feel like you weren't being heard when did you feel like you were being retraumatized when did you feel like you were being re-victimized what changes can we make to protect you better yeah yeah and that is a a means of empowerment is giving back protecting others giving back to the system to make it stronger I can't think of a more satisfying point of let's call it post-traumatic growth than being able to change the very system to help protect more people in the future. Well it's interesting because among the 30 people I interviewed were actually six who did not only report the crimes but went through the whole criminal justice or deal for two conviction and sentencing of the perpetrator and they said the reason they did it was I knew he'd done this to other people yeah and I just couldn't live with myself if I found out he did it again because I was too afraid to face you know face him in court yeah um and so the map because you know it was no fun but they basically said if I can you know if I if I can prevent this from happening to one other person then it won't have been a day absolutely you know I hate to do this because we're we're out of time I feel like I could talk to you for so much longer so I'll ask it's a big subject it is but I'm so glad that you spent I mean your time with us today it's a real honor to sit and chat with you I hope that we can maybe reconnect sometime in the future to dig a little deeper but I just want to take a moment to thank you so much for being here well thank you for having me and a pleasure talking with you absolutely everybody the book is truth and repair how trauma survivors and vision justice by Dr. Judith Herman and everybody listening thank you for coming back a week after week I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk to you
