Hello everyone and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, December 9th, 2024, and I'm the host of the show, Dr. Cara Santa Maria. And as always before we dive into this week's episode, I do want to thank those of you who make Talk Nerdy possible. Remember this show will always be. It is and will always be 100% free to download. The way we keep that going is by relying on the support of individuals just like you. If you're interested in pledging your support for the time being, we're continuing on in as per. That's the word I'm looking for on a per episode basis that we'll be changing with Patreon's rules soon. But for now, we can keep going in that direction. All you've got to do is visit patreon.com slash Talk Nerdy to learn more. This week's top patrons include Anu Baravaj, Daniel Lang, David J.E. Smith, Mary Niva, Brian Holden, David Compton, Gabrielle F. Haramio, Joe Wilkinson, Joseph Lamore, Pesquale Geladi, Rika Maharaj and O'Rika Hagman. All right, let's get into it. This week I had the opportunity to chat with Sarah C. Bronin. She is an architect and attorney, a policymaker and a professor at Cornell University. And she has a new book out called Key to the City, How Zoning Shapes Our World. So without any further ado, here she is Sarah C. Bronin. Sarah, thank you so much for joining me today. Thanks, Cara. I am looking forward to chatting about your really interesting work and also about your new book Key to the City, How Zoning Shapes Our World. But before we get into the ins and outs of zoning and how we are really affected by these policies that many of us aren't even aware of, I would love to learn a little bit more about you and kind of how you got to be a subject matter expert because you have an interesting background, your legal scholar and an architect. Yeah, I mean, I've always been interested in my neighborhood, in places, in buildings. Yeah, I went to architecture school first, then I got a graduate degree in history and then law school was able to in each of those areas pursue the study of the built environment and policies and laws related to the built environment and of course by extension our cities. And then I really started delving into these questions of zoning and historic preservation law actually as well as a professor and now I'm at Cornell and continue to do that. And my interest, again, really just stems from one basic question, which is why do we have the communities that we have? The answer is almost always a legal answer, believe me, Sherry. Yeah, yeah. When did that really, I mean, it's funny because I think as adults with responsibilities and mortgages and experience, it's clear that these are important questions to be asking and important issues to be diving into. But when we're young, I don't know how much awareness we have of all of these ins and outs. So I'm curious, when did these questions start bubbling up for you? Probably during architecture school as an undergraduate because of course we learn how to design buildings, but we weren't necessarily well versed at the end of our time in how things like building codes or zoning codes actually influenced what we could design. And I think I felt like that was a missing piece. We had one class, a professional practice class that touched on some of these issues. And that's one of the reasons why I thought that going to law school would be a good thing to pursue because we didn't get enough information about the rules of the game in architecture school. I thought that was a really important part of being an architecture, frankly, impacting anything related to the built environment. Yeah, yeah. And I don't know, when your book came across my desk, I remember thinking, wow, this is like a fascinating topic that we don't often talk about. But then I also tried to take the frame of my listeners and asked myself, is this a fascinating topic? And I think it is, and clearly you think it is, as you've dedicated your career to it. But I'm curious about that sort of disconnect with the general public. I sometimes struggle with this when I have computer scientists on the show or mathematicians on the show, is there a time in a place where sort of most people say, I don't care. Like, this is not something I want to spend time thinking about. I found that when people start to pull the thread of zoning and they pull and they pull and they keep going, they start to realize, oh my gosh, this thing has been here all along. And we don't know enough about it. And that's one reason why I wrote Keita the city, which is to take those people who might be interested in pulling that thread and carry them through all of these places and different zoning issues to try to show that this is actually super fascinating because it dictates zoning dictates virtually everything that gets built in a community. And I think it's hugely consequential. And once you see it, you can't unsee it. And unlike mathematics or maybe some of the topics of your other guests, everybody lives in a community. Everybody has a neighborhood. The neighborhoods come in different forms and they come in different types of places, rules, urban, urban. But everybody can observe the conditions in their neighborhood. And again, making that connection to zoning, I think often is an eye-opening experience. Oh, absolutely. And we'll get to this, but definitely including all of those historical up till the present day pressures that shape the way that these communities were built intentionally, or not intentionally, but very often intentionally. I think that as human beings, and I'm coming at this as a psychologist, there is a tendency to assume an essentialist view, just sort of like the way things are is the way things are because that's the way things are meant to be or the way things are supposed to be. But the way things are, the way things are because of choices people made. And there are people behind these decisions. And I think that is, as we get into this, one of the, for me at least, most important things to remember is that policies are intentional. Sometimes they have unintended consequences, and sometimes they have very intentional consequences. But the way our communities are is not just willy-nilly, right? Like a lot of choices were made by a lot of people with intentionality. Choices that include not just these lengthy texts where the outlines of different districts within the community are laid out in great detail. But also maps where line drawing tells you exactly how your neighborhood is going to look. So very intentionally in terms of this technical framework, the maps, the line drawings. But also, I think you're referring to to maybe the history of zoning and the fact that a hundred years ago it emerged as a tool, primarily for separation and even segregation. That that sometimes segregation in particular written explicitly into zoning codes, that of course is no longer legal. But some people feel that the intent to exclude is very much alive and is embedded in zoning codes around the country that make it harder for people to live in a community by restricting the amount of housing that can be built in it. So maybe we take a step back and we talk first about that word that we keep using zoning. What is zoning? What does that word actually mean? I define it as the basically the division of a community into districts that are distinctly regulated. And that regulation can take the form of regulation on land uses. So what goes what happens inside a building. The structures on that land, so essentially how a building can be built, how tall it can be, what shape it might take, and the lots on which these buildings are built. And so the lots, how big they are, how much of them can be developed and so on. So uses structures and lots. And zoning is the district-based regulation of all of that. And so I am recording back in time because I'm over here in Los Angeles. You are a little ahead of me in Dc. Are you in Dc currently? I sure am. In Dc, yeah. And so we are sort of on opposite sides of the country. And we are both experiencing the, I guess, repercussions sound strong, but the outcomes of these zoning laws. So I'm curious when you first started to dig into writing this book, obviously you had a wealth of knowledge even going into it. But where did you start? How did you say, okay, this is how I'm going to tackle this topic? Well, I started really in conversations with my agent and publisher, both of whom obviously have much more extensive experience than I do as a writer, something that I've written a lot of legal texts, whether that's legal treatises or books or law review articles. And the shift to writing for a more popular audience was something that I did have to think about. And as we talked about maybe how I might pull this off, it was suggested that I go back to the people. And you mentioned new people are part of these conversations and the individuals and specific places. And the place where I've had the most experience in zoning issues is the city of Hartford, Connecticut, Connecticut's capital city, where I chaired the city planning and zoning commission for seven years. And I was able to think back to the hundreds and hundreds of people that I met during that process and worked with and fellow commissioners and individual neighborhood leaders and small business owners and even kids and tried to think of who might be representative of the issues that people in neighborhoods all over the country might be grappling with. And so I picked the first person in my book is a neighborhood leader that was gracious enough to walk around the city with me, a woman named Denise Best. I also highlighted a small business owner who was just trying to build a brewery. All he wanted was a simple brewery and tells his story and so on. And it's not all people from Hartford certainly, but they formed the core of the book because that's really where my zoning experience comes from. That's why I learned so much about how zoning works on the ground beyond just the legal expertise that I seem to have amassed as a law professor. And it seems as though you sort of divided the book roughly, I mean, I think they interweave quite a bit, but divided the book into three general sections. Like you talked about sort of like commercial and then you talked about residential and then you just talked about general design and aesthetics of sort of the entire community that we live in. Would you say that that's a good summary? I think for me the way that I had conceived of the whole book was very much like that in one way, maybe not residential commercial, so much as really this thing that I referred to in the very last paragraph of the book, the Vitruvian triad of firmness, commodity, and delight. This Roman architects way of looking at buildings. So you mentioned the delight part. Firmness refers to how a building, how strong a building is, whether it will stand up. And when I think of that as applied to a city, they think of things like the street networks, the roads, the things that make us the infrastructure and even nature as infrastructure, which is the focus of one of my paragraphs. And then commodity is sort of the usefulness of things. And I do have, you know, the book starts with this first part on vibrant economies and then talks about the essentials, which might be the commodity part and then delight and designing for delight. That's the delight part. But I do think that these things are all interrelated across different uses, you know, whether it's residential, commercial, open space, industrial uses, institutional and governmental uses. Adult uses are covered in the book. So those are the nightlife related uses. And I mean, all of these come together to influence whether our communities are well connected, whether they're accessible, whether they satisfy our very human need for a beautiful environment. So can you help us understand a little bit? And you know, I'd say that probably over 50% of the listeners of the show are here in the United States. But a large minority are around the world where they may have their own zoning laws, their own zoning regulations, or none at all, or maybe that's not how they refer to it. Maybe there's a totally different kind of approach to regulation in those areas. But when we talk about zones, right, we're talking about zoning. So there are zones in a community in a city. And those zones are then legally defined as being able to say, this can be here, but this cannot. Like how do what is kind of the structure of that decision making? Well, the way that zoning concerns very big picture, the way that zoning codes are adopted are by local governments, usually local bodies of elected officials like city councils or boards of alderman. And they set out the text and they decide on the map. So when they set out both of these documents, they identify these zoning districts, some people call them districts, some people call them zones, some people call them zoning districts. But in any case, these districts, they're given a name, they're given a set of rules. And just as you say or suggest, you know, they're given rules that say you could have these types of uses and not these other types of uses. Sometimes those rules are in the form of a chart. We have a use chart in the city of Hartford zoning code that we rewrote that's three pages long. When we overhauled the zoning code in 2016, that use chart replaced 61 pages of narrative text. So again, it runs the gamut in terms of how local government will set out what's allowed in each district and the level of detail that they would use. I think we should probably be less detailed and less prescriptive in those uses. And I think that probably will improve outcomes. I think we should be more less prescriptive and less detailed in those uses. And that should improve outcomes on the ground because it will make zoning codes easier to administer. And so when you say improve outcomes, really what you're referring to is builders and developers and investors and residents and everybody who's involved, all the different interested parties, being able to do within that city without too much restraint. Well, improving outcomes could be a process improvement. And that's I think what you're referring to, like clarity and predictability, both good things to have. But I also meant improve the way that our communities actually work and are built. And the kinds of opportunities that people who live in work in those communities have, opportunities which are often controlled by zoning. So if you live in one of the many, many communities across the country, in fact, the vast majority of the country that is zoned for residential uses only, you have a certain type of experience. That experience often does not include being able to walk down the street to get a snack or being able to go around the corner to get a haircut. Those are the kinds of experiences though that make a community lively and that gets you out of your car and let you walk around. But again, most American communities are not designed that way and that's because of zoning. Well, it's fascinating to think about. I think I forget sometimes what a bubble I'm in living in a really, really large city like Los Angeles, which has a very specific flavor, probably like 99% due to zoning. I often describe L.A. to my friends who don't live here as a large urban city that feels very suburban. So you can live in a house, you can have a yard, but you can also walk to a convenience store or a Starbucks or wherever you need to go depending on the neighborhood that you're in usually pretty easily. Like you have the perks of being in a very urban center with the feeling of a more suburban city. And I've always loved that it has the best of both worlds here. But that you're right, that's not always the case. I think back to my time spent in Texas and very often when you're in these large planned communities, you have to drive out of them to do anything. I love how you characterize L.A. as being the best of all worlds. Not everybody would characterize it that way. So look at first, get that out. But I think, in these big, diverse cities with lots of different neighborhoods, I mean, L.A. has, but probably I actually don't know how many zoning districts L.A. has. Oh, I mean, it's a massive city, like land-wise. So probably. But it is a massive city. But it actually, I don't think has a zoning code that's longer than a much smaller city, the city of Boston, which is 42 square miles and has a 3,800 page zoning code. Oh, chump. Even New York cities is only a couple thousand pages. So most codes, by the way, not to alarm your listeners. Most codes are about 150, 200 pages. Still very lengthy, but not several thousand pages. And I think I'm a bite of last-my-trained thought there, but only to say that cities, even very complicated cities, sometimes have very short zoning codes. Like, Chicago is only 300 something pages, which again, Chicago, like L.A. is a very complicated city with lots of different neighborhoods, lots of different types of developments. And yet it has a trim zoning code that happened after a comprehensive rezoning, which most cities are afraid to do. So I talked about the process by which zoning codes are adopted. And most of the changes that are made after a zoning code was adopted 50 years ago, 100 years ago, have been piecemeal changes. Not the kind of change we made in Harvard, which is overhauling the whole code. And the reason for that is just people feel like they have some expectations in the existing zoning code, even when it's hurting them. So in Tita the City, I try to point out those types of zoning provisions that can be really harmful, and also show us some places where communities have changed their codes to help to actually satisfy community priorities and needs. Can you share maybe a really obvious example of a zoning code actually harming the residents within the community? I also maybe talk about a potentially non-obvious example actually. Oh yeah. A provision in zoning codes, virtually in every zoning code in the country, that says that for everything you build on a piece of property, you have to build a parking space, or two spaces, or hundreds of spaces depending on what you're building exactly. And then some people might say, well, that parking space is requiring that as a good idea, because you don't want the parking to be spilling out into the street. You don't want for a developer to not provide enough parking for, let's say, a new apartment building. But what we have actually seen in minimum parking requirements is that they increase the price of housing, because they decrease the amount of housing that can be built on a lot. And they actually create infrastructure for cars that encourages more driving, more curb cuts. And we also know that developers, if they need to attract tenants, they're going to build parking into their model. But zoning codes all over the country don't disregard that. They sort of say, well, you know, that's something that we that we're going to mandate, whether it's needed or not. And you know, you can't really, to me, those are not justifiable in a zoning code for a number of different reasons. And I think that's an awareness that people are starting to have, thanks to the parking reform network and some other groups out there, the work of UCLA professor Donald Schoep. And I'm hoping that those are exactly the kinds of provisions that I reveal in the book that say, hey, this is something that we do just as a routine. We've just done it in every, virtually every zoning jurisdiction. By the way, not in the city of Hartford, where we lifted minimum parking's citywide. You know, it's interesting because it also goes to show something that we were sort of tapping into a couple questions back, which is this idea that like zoning cities, the experience of as an individual or a family living within a community, they're just not one size fits all. Like, I described L.A. as having the best of both worlds, urban and suburban. And you sort of laughed your like, yeah, not everybody sees it that way. And, you know, I think about parking, for example, that encouraging less car use or encouraging more car use is going to be deeply dependent on the public transit within the city, on the population density within the city. You know, there are places where you just cannot get by without a car. And there are other places where most people don't have cars. When you think about the way zoning codes work, though, which is to add requirements to existing buildings that have changed their uses. So conversions that are happening in a lot of places in L.A. or adding requirements to new buildings that are being constructed, you do wonder whether developers themselves recognize that if they're in a neighborhood where people need a car, they'll build enough parking spaces so that the residents have access to it. And probably not a parking space more. You do see in L.A. a pretty innovative adaptive reuse ordinance that cuts down on minimum parking requirements for conversions, particularly conversions from office to housing. And that's been really successful. And, you know, you hope that you see more jurisdictions adopt that approach sitting wide, at least for those conversions, because those are the kinds of projects that are that are desperately needed in cities all over the country and that that are hindered by minimum parking requirements that say that, well, if you change it from office to residential, you've now got to add all this parking parking that was never built in the first place on those lots. And so where is it going to go? And instead, the buildings just sit there or you have to go through a big variance process. So that's, it does have some consequences that people who might think, again, on its face, this is logical and reasonable, but it's really, it's really not. I'm curious only because I live, okay, so I live in an interesting, very modern. Some people hate it. I personally love it from an environmental perspective, but I live in small lot housing in Los Angeles. So they're single family homes. They're sold to single family homes, not townhouses, condos, whatever, because there's like the tiniest air gap in between each house. And, but there are these tall structures where like my, the square footage of my house is higher than the square footage of the lot that I own, because it's built up, right? And this is kind of a new, maybe not so new anymore, but trend that you see in these urban areas where more people can live on less land, but still have a lot of the, I think, comforts of owning their own home. And a lot of these small lot houses, the ones in the front of my development, for example, that face the main street are mixed use. So they have a commercial space downstairs, and then they have the living spaces upstairs. And I've always been really curious about mixed use housing, and why we see it so often in larger cities, and we almost never see it in more suburban areas. Well, mixed use neighborhoods provide what I think a lot of people would like to see, and that is the convenience that I mentioned earlier, and also just the basic neighborhood vitality, not to mention the fact that it means that they can do more with their properties. We don't see it in vast swaths of the country, though, because there had been, especially in the 1960s, even 70s, and of course, continuing onward, this idea that the American dream were these large lot single-family housing only communities with a driveway and two cars in every yard, and all of that. So American communities were built to meet that supposed dream, a dream that we are seeing now is a dream that is confining us to our cars, requiring us to drive everywhere, and kind of making too many of us live in boring places. And maybe people want to live that way, and we do, you know, I see that there's a preference for that, because people live in suburbs and not in central cities. But there are a lot more people who would like to live a more urban, more connected neighborhood, don't have the opportunity to do so because they are illegal to build. So I think your neighborhood is one of the exceptions to that, and one of my research projects, the National Zoning Atlas, which is online at zoningatlist.org, reveals just how much land is devoted to only residential uses, and it's a bit startling. As in, it's most of it. The vast majority of land that we have logged in the 5,000 cities, counties, towns, and villages that we've included on the map are primarily residential zones. I can't help but feel like, I know this is like the weirdest comparison, but I'm very morbid sometimes, and a lot of my work involves death. That's a separate conversation for a separate day. But I can't help but feel like it's the same as the cemetery problem. There's just so many of us, and we can't keep taking up so much space just for our bodies. We have to figure out how to utilize this space in creative ways. Well, there is such a thing, by the way, as cemetery zoning. If you want to talk deeply about that, in fact, we were just looking at one of the large cemeteries in Brooklyn, which is actually zoned for residential uses. There's a whole side conversation that can definitely be had on cemetery related zoning. Sometimes it's covered in open space, in the very strange case of the Brooklyn zoning, it's residential land. That's fascinating. Yes. I think there is a whole side conversation on that. Yes. But it is interesting to think about these core questions. I think people think about, okay, we're talking about zoning, we're talking about how it shapes our world, but really at its base, we are individuals or families, or at whatever level of resolution we want to be viewed, and we are trying to exist in a community. We have to eat here, we have to sleep here, we have to work here, we have to purchase our goods and services here, and how really do we do that in a way that is good for the economy, good for safety, good for the well-being and education of our children, of our older adults, and just thrive. I think that coming back to the earlier conversation, not everybody in a community wants the same things. And so how then do these districts, these city councils, or these different organizing bodies come to a consensus when they're hearing from their constituents wildly different arguments. It's difficult for decision makers who hear predominantly from one group, and we've seen that from people who have studied zoning meetings, that one group typically tends to be homeowners that have been in the community for some time. So for projects that are being proposed for new housing, or God forbid, new apartments, you see opposition that influences local decision makers in a way that kind of leads them to keep their communities more limited, more exclusionary. That kind of political push has started to reverse because of movements like the yes in my backyard, the Yimbi movements, and the much more concerted efforts nationally to promote housing reform and to promote zoning reform. But in the end of the day, it's the local official that's hearing from people they see at the grocery store that's making decisions about zoning. And it does put a, maybe not a permanent damper, but it does slow down big changes that are probably needed to address a lot of different things we're seeing nationally, including the housing shortage across all kinds of communities. That's one of the reasons why you see states getting more involved in articulating what kinds of powers local governments can exercise at the local level because it is the states after all that have given the local governments their authority to zone. So with that in mind, you see you have seen states all over the country that have in some ways lended a hand to those beleaguered local elected officials that want to make a difference, but are only hearing from one part of their population. You know, it's interesting you mentioned these movements like the Yimbi movement, which is obviously a counterpart to this historical and even heavily still today, NIMBI mentality of not in my backyard. And so I'm curious about some of these consequences, like we started the conversation referencing of maybe those with the loudest voices, those who are most likely to show up or those with homeowners who have the means to be able to go to these meetings, to be able to hire the babysitter, etc. What happens when the zoning laws are written to keep things and people out, whether it's racial discrimination, whether it's we don't want these low income neighborhoods, whether it's we don't want, I don't know liquor stores or ex-wisey. I don't want this in not in my backyard. So okay, not in my backyard, where do these things go? Because these people still exist and these businesses still exist. The consequence for communities is often felt by the members that are in the communities themselves, not having diverse housing options means that their children can't access their community. It means that when they age out of having a large lawn and not maybe they age out of driving, they don't have townhouse or condo options to go to because they went and protested it 20 years ago. So I think in a lot of ways we have seen that communities that have kept new housing options out have hurt primarily themselves. You also see that the demand for services that that continues to rise, the demand to pave and maintain roads and infrastructure for larger lot communities. Those services could be assisted, improved if there were more housing oftentimes. So allowing property owners to add an accessory dwelling unit to their garage or to their third floor, makes the property more valuable for the homeowner of course because they get that extra income. And the property taxes and that property could rise to allowing the local government to get a little cut of that as well. So you can see how adding additional housing within existing communities, even with something as small as an accessory dwelling unit, which by the way are legal all over California now. Yeah, I was going to say they're ADUs everywhere in LA. It's so cool. It's because you also see that you can have then multi-generational living on the same property. And they've been very popular. It took the California legislature lots of years to get it right, but essentially what they've done is they've overridden local rules that would prohibit accessory dwelling units. And they've said, nope, you've got to you've got to allow them. And people have built tons of them. They've become a really great source for housing again for people to stay in their homes with that little extra income. And I think they've at least from, it sounds like you're telling as well, but from scholars and others have said these have been a very net positive. And that's been, you know, the stroke of a pen in Sacramento that's trickled down to local governments having to approve these. But I think it's again a very important lesson that if you allow people to explore these housing options, they do it. And they do it in a way that the benefits even the existing property owners. So the protests against them, I think, maybe it may have been that happened over the years, have been really muted now because of the how successful they've been. Yeah, it's that seems to be the case. And, you know, I mean, I asked kind of a broader question here as we're starting to shift gears and wrap up because there's still so much more to get into, but we're just not going to have time to get into everything. But I can't help. And this is probably a theoretical line that I'm drawing. So I want you to help me with the, you know, the hard data, but I can't help but draw a somewhat theoretical line between what we were just talking about, the ability to like put an ADU on a property and have a lower price point rental or allow somebody's young adult child kind of transitional housing. I can't help but draw a direct line between that and homelessness, you know, between that and this one of I think the biggest problems facing large cities today and just biggest problems facing the moral structure of our communities, that there are people literally living on the street. There are people literally unable to put a roof over their head because they either cannot afford housing or their addiction or their mental illness is precluding them from being able to maintain housing. This is a zoning issue, is it not like there are real solutions that are that are tracked back to zoning that directly affect how many people are living on the street. Zoning is what dictates whether housing is built or not and it dictates how expensive that housing will be because extra process that's required in zoning, long delays, long review periods, uncertainties about the design and things like minimum parking requirements and caps on heights can really constrain the amount of housing that can be built. Now in some places we say okay that this you know design constraints are a good idea, it'll help us to manage growth in our communities but I think in tandem with those kinds of maybe common sense sort of bulk and mass rules you want to have also rules that allow housing in a much bigger scale and in much greater numbers than we allow today. It is a failing of our society, it is immoral and ethical that we do so much to make it hard to build housing and the consequences of that are visible in every street in virtually every community in America with the people who are unhoused and fortunately having no other choice. Yeah, yeah I think that's an important point to really just sit with that yes it is more complicated than that but also it is that simple. If there's not a place for somebody to be able to go and they can't afford to go there, they won't go there. Like if you can't afford a roof over your head because either there aren't enough roofs like there literally aren't enough places for the amount of people there are or those places are out of financial reach then people will be unhoused. In some ways it is that simple. People are unhoused because they do not have housing and so it plays a huge role in it. So you know whether you come to the conversation about zoning thinking primarily about housing which is what we've mostly talked about today or you see how zoning might actually have these cumulative effects on the environment with the minimum lot sizes in particular on local economies with how and whether small businesses are allowed to exist or expand on our sense of beauty and place which is something that's influenced by zoning. I just think you know zoning has again all of these threads too unravel and I hope that I've covered a whole bunch of them in the book. Absolutely even the things that we didn't get to today as you mentioned you know tree cover green belts places to be able to grow food like all of these things that really do deeply impact communities and sometimes butt up against things like more housing that that delicate balance you really dive deep into so many different areas within the book and I'm I'm grateful first of all for your work because I think it's one of those unsung thing you know it's often happening in the background I think a lot of people just don't peel back the curtain to think about how important these conversations these policy decisions are to our day-to-day life and I think that this book does a beautiful job of sort of bringing that to the surface so that now when we are walking around in our communities we can appreciate them at a deeper level and I think that level of understanding helps us have more ownership over the place that we call home. Oh I love that thank you for saying that I that's exactly why I wrote this book oh I'm so glad everybody the book is key to the city how zoning shapes our world by Sarah C. Bronan Sarah thank you so much for spending time with us today thank you so much for having me Cara absolutely and everybody listening thank you for coming back week after week I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk yeah
