Hello everyone and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, September 9th, 2024, and I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. Apologies that we were off last week for the holiday. Things have been pretty hectic around here. I've also had some health issues and needed to take a little bit of time, but we are back and I'm very excited to dive into, ha ha, no pun intended. You'll see why this week's episode. But before we do, I do want to thank those of you who make Talk Nerdy possible. And the way that we really keep the episodes going each week is through the platform Patreon. There are going to be some changes coming up to a few things that Patreon, like the ways that Patreon is operating, especially as it relates to how Apple utilizes the app. So we're going to make some announcements both on the show and directly to the patrons here in the next several weeks. Keep an ear out. And if you are one of the people affected by these changes, hopefully we'll give you ample time to make them. And you may have heard about them on other shows as well. But I do want to thank this week's top patrons. They include Anu Badavaj, Daniel Lang, David J. Esmith, Mary Niva, Rika Mahraj, Brian Holden, David Compton, Gabrielle F. Haramio, Joe Wilkinson, Pascuali Delati, and Ulrika Hagman. You and everyone else, all of the patrons, they're too numerous to list. You are the ones who make it possible for me to keep doing this show each week to pay all of the incredible people who keep it going, including the editing firm that I use as well as my producer and long standing, Jack of All Trades, Assistant, Noel Dilworth. Thank you all so much. And if you're interested in pledging, all you've got to do is visit patreon. That's PATREN.com slash talk nerdy. All right, so what have we got for you today? So I had the opportunity to speak with Jasmine Graham about her new book, Sharks Don't Sink, Adventures of a Rogue Shark Scientist. So Jasmine is a marine biologist, specializing in ecology and evolution, especially of small tooth, softfish, and hammerhead sharks. She's won multiple awards. She hosts PBS's Sharks Unknown with Jasmine Graham. And she's also the president of MISS, M-I-S-S, minorities in shark science. We're going to dig into all of that now, as we speak, with the author of Sharks Don't Sink, Adventures of a Rogue Shark Scientist. Here she is, Jasmine Graham. Well, Jasmine, thank you so much for joining me today. Thanks for having me. So we're going to be talking about your new book, Sharks Don't Sink, Adventures of a Rogue Shark Scientist. So before we even really get into all of the fun stories, what does that mean? Tell me a little bit. What does it mean to be a Rogue Shark Scientist? As opposed to one on the straight and narrow? Yeah, I would say being a Rogue Shark Scientist is kind of taking your own path and operating outside of the traditional academic setting. So I went Rogue because I honestly feel like the systems, the powers that be in science are a little bit ridiculous, toxic, and unnecessary. And so I kind of just stepped outside of that. I did love science at its core, asking questions, and trying to figure out the answers. What I didn't love was the politics. So I stepped outside of that, hoping to kind of change that and address those issues from the outside. But yeah, I kind of just do my own thing, not associated with any large bureaucrat. I think that's a great, very dramatic institution, or academic institution. And it's been really nice. I love that. And I would love to hear a little bit, maybe right here at the top, about some of those frustrations and some of the ways that the work that you're doing now over comes them. You know, when I think about traditional academics and the traditional path, I think about ways that it is really not friendly to women, especially to black women, but honestly, I don't think it's that healthy just for anyone. And so I'm curious what some of those, I don't know, some of those, I don't want to call them hurdles or roadblocks, but maybe roadblocks is better because that that shows intent. What were some of those frustrations that you were facing? Yeah, well, for one thing, academia is super hierarchical. There is somebody in charge and there's a lot of metaphorically kissing the ring of the mafia of the powers that be. You have institutions that are set up where, okay, this person has tenure, therefore they can do whatever they want, which I feel like is a problem. And then there's also this idea that, oh, when you're going through graduate school, effectively one person is in control of whether you get that degree or not. And you have a committee, but the committee kind of follows the lead of the chair of the committee, who's usually your advisor. And so I know lots of people who have issues where their advisor just refused to give them at the degree because of whatever reason. And it's kind of ridiculous. Yeah, it's kind of ridiculous that somebody could just decide that for you. Just decide, nope, actually hate you, not going to give you a degree. And so that creates situations where people feel like they have to put up with a lot of stuff that honestly they shouldn't have to be putting up with. Sexual harassment, even sexual assault, even racism, abuse, all sorts of things. And so what we try to do at Miss is break down that hierarchy and say, look, we're all here. We're all doing science. It doesn't matter who you are. It doesn't matter what letters you have after your name. That doesn't make you more valuable than anyone else. And we're all equal partners in this. And you might have somebody with more experience. That doesn't mean they get to do whatever they want. There's still accountability. And that's the accountability that I feel like is lacking in academia. There's also this sort of publisher parish mentality where it's like if you aren't doing the most at all times, given 110% you're a bad scientist. And it's like, look, dudes, it's 110% is literally impossible. We're scientists. We know how math works. You cannot give 110%. That is impossible. You can't even give 100% 100% of the time because you got to have some percentages for other things like eating and having a life and environmental health. So those sorts of things of well, I only value you by the number of papers you publish and the quality of the journals that those papers are in, which is just arbitrary nonsense. That doesn't have anything to do with whether somebody is doing good science or not. It's just a dumb metric that we apply. And so with the way we challenge this at Miss is, I mean, we don't care about GPAs when we have our programs. We don't care about how many papers you've published. You don't get an extra pat on the back for publishing a bunch of things. What we care about is, are you doing good science and are you a good person? Because we're all people and we're all interacting with each other. And I think sometimes people have this misguided idea that scientists are objective and we don't have biases and we don't have other things that other people have. There's this idea that scientists are better than everyone else, which is absolutely not true. I've met some really, really just dicks of people that have PhDs. It's like that didn't, that did not make you, it does not make you good person. It doesn't even make you a smart person. I've also met a lot of people that do some dumb stuff and they had PhDs. And so none of that means anything. It's all about how do you interact with people? How do you create an environment that is conducive to learning and growth? Because learning and growth is essential to doing science. If you walk around believing that you're right all the time, I mean we would still think that the earth was the center of the universe if we refuse to admit that sometimes we're wrong. And so that's kind of the angle that miscomes that is I'm just as likely to be wrong as you are. We're on even playing field. First and foremost, do you respect other people? It doesn't matter how, quote unquote, good of a scientist you are by these silly metrics. You can't work with us if you aren't at your core behaving well as a person because you are a human being first. Science is just your job. And I think sometimes we flip that and we're like, I'm a scientist and that's all of my identity and the rest of it just kind of goes way and it doesn't. And it's good that it doesn't because if we don't bring our identities with us, all of this other stuff that makes us human and makes us have these different perspectives and be able to look at problems from different angles, we aren't actually going to get anywhere because we can't be robots. We got to think for ourselves. A hundred percent. You know, there's so much to kind of dive into there. I think first and foremost, let's talk a little bit more about miss. So miss stands for minorities in shark sciences. Tell me a little bit about how it was founded, who you founded it with and what it is that you do. Miss was founded in a really interesting way. It's actually a story of social media being good. So back in the day, back in the day when Twitter was Twitter before Giddle Day, Mosky took over, we had this hashtag that was called Black in Nature. And it was the celebration of Black people being outside and it was sort of this bold proclamation that, look, Black people deserve to be outside as much as anybody else. We shouldn't be getting harassed in the central park. We shouldn't be getting shot at while we're jogging. We should be able to exist and vibe like anyone else. And so we're going, scrolling through, and I posted a picture with my hashtag Black in Nature of me doing shark research because when I'm out in nature, that's a lot of times what I'm doing. And I was scrolling and then I saw another Black woman doing shark research in her photo. And I was like, what? Because up until this point, I was actually very convinced that I was the only Black woman doing shark science. I was the member of a scientific society. I was the only Black member of that scientific society. I was like, okay, I guess it's just me. I don't know. I guess I'll just keep going. And so to see Carly's picture was like spotting a unicorn in the wild. Like you're just walking down a field and suddenly a unicorn appears. It was pretty wild. And so then I immediately reached out to her and said, whoa, another Black girl in shark science. This is wild. And then Amani Weber Sholtz chimed in and said, oh, I'm a Black girl in shark science too. And then Jada Elcock chimed in. And so now we have, we have Carly, Bohannon, we have Jada Elcock Amani Weber Sholtz and myself. We're all getting together on, we took the conversation to our DMs and we're talking and we're kind of just, you know, whenever you get together with your pals and you just start just like, let in the T spill. Yeah. So we're letting the T spill. And we realize, wait a minute, you all are going through the same craft that I'm going through. So this is not a me making this up, which for a long time I had been made to feel because every time I brought something up, it was, well, I'm sure they didn't mean it that way. Well, maybe you're overreacting. I don't think that was their intention. You know, all of these sort of things that's like, basically, I don't believe you. Oh, the gaslighting. And so to have all these people to be like, oh, yeah, you randomly have white people walk up and grab your hair at conferences. Yep. Me too. And I'm like, thank you. That's weird, right? It's not, it's not normal. And so we're talking about that. And that's when we kind of said, hey, we should, we should actually, you know, start a club. We had jokingly said that on Twitter. But then we were just got into the DMs. We were like, no, we actually should do this. We should actually get people together. This is very cathartic to be able to talk about these things and have this real talk and validate each other. And so we decided we were going to have this workshop where we were going to bring all of these people to Miami and just have just like women of color on a boat be and fabulous, doing shark research, networking, sharing their research, learning new skills, and just communing together. And the very first thing that we wanted to do is to make sure that everyone had access to it that wanted it. And that meant that we needed to be able to provide airfare and transportation for everyone to get to Miami so that they could participate in this. And so we decided we're going to do a little fundraiser. And we figured out about $12,000 would probably be enough to get people to Miami because we thought to ourselves how many people could there be, right? Spoiler a lot. And then we said, well, let's set our goal at $25,000 by the end of the year so that we can have money to do it again another year. And we have like enough money in the bank for a second year. And so we set our little goal. We made our website. We posted on social media. And then two weeks later, we suddenly had $35,000. And we were all like, oh, oh damn. Okay, I guess we got to figure out something because money is still rolling in. People are all hype. Everybody's coming out of the woodwork. And we said, well, I think this is a bigger movement than we thought it was going to be. And so we decided to create a nonprofit to be able to expand on this because so many people were emailing us and sending us messages on Twitter and Instagram saying, I really needed this community. I was about to give up on Shark Science. Or older people that said, I wish this existed 10, 15 years ago because maybe I would still be doing science. Maybe I wouldn't have quit. And then we had people with their kids. The kids really got me of like people saying like, oh, we shared this Facebook post with our daughter. And she's super excited. And she wants to be a Shark Scientist too. And it was really good for her to see someone that looked like her doing this. And it was just kind of like, wow, we have done a thing. And with great power, it comes great responsibility. Says Uncle Ben from Spider-Man. So we were like, okay, there are a lot of people that need this. And they're putting their trust in us. We're going to do it. And we're going to do it right. And so we started miss. We opened for membership. That was a little over four years ago. Now we have 500 members representing 34 different countries. And the majority of US states and territories. And these are all like young women of color who are either actively working as Shark Scientist or who are aspiring to be Shark Scientists. Yeah, exactly. So we have all the way to high school students. So we accept members as the youngest high school. And then we have all the way to the rest of your career journey. So we have some mid-career folks very few because of all of the issues that have existed. Unfortunately, very few women of color have made it past early career stage. And that is very apparent when you look at miss and our makeup. There's maybe a handful of people that see themselves as being mid-career folks. And no late career people, which makes sense because of historically, they're just literally hasn't been enough time. And that's what people don't realize is that there has not been enough time for someone to get to that point because it was very, very recently that women started being, you know, seen as people that you can promote. Others a lot of times people were passed over. People weren't getting tenure. I even had when I was in school people saying things like, oh well, it's really hard for women to get tenure because they take breaks because they have children. And so my recommendation to get tenure is to not have children. Like, you don't say that to men. Like, no, the men get to just keep going. Yeah, that takes me back to another point that is so salient that you made earlier, which was that this publisher parish put everything that you have into your work. It's easy to say that when you have a wife supporting you and you have a wife raising your children, you know, and like, I'm a single woman without kids, but it's still different than having a partner who doesn't, you know, who is living to make sure that you can be successful in your career. It's a lot easier to have this traditional, I hate to even use the word traditional historical, academic career when it was built for you, you know, when it was built for a middle to upper class white nuclear family where the man is the scientist and he is able to dedicate eight to 14 hours a day at work, 16 hours, whatever, and be supported at home. But not only is that not the reality for most people anymore, it's never been the reality for most people of color and definitely not for women. Yeah, exactly. And so it's very frustrating when people say things like that or when the expectation is even before you get to that point, there is there are people that will not hire or recruit women into their labs because they're like, well, I'm afraid that they're going to get pregnant and leave. And they just made that decision. Like, I mean, I'm going to hire you. Which by the way, is like completely against the law, but I guess they can they can make up any excuse they want to. That's the problem. Yeah, because there is no accountability for whenever, especially in academics, it's, it's, oh, well, I have all these people that are emailing me wanting to get into my graduate lab. And I've made the decision unilaterally of who's getting in and who's not getting in. I know people who they they're supervisor, they're women and they wanted to hire another woman. And their supervisor said, no, you can't hire another woman because I can't send two women out in the field together alone. What? Why? Right. I'm like, I'm sorry, do my ovaries prevent me from doing this when there's not a penis on board? Like, what? Are you afraid the sharks are going to follow us? Because we might be on our periods at the same time. Like, what is this? What year is it? Oh my God, that's so infuriating. Infuriating. And so talk to me about that shift, that change because you know, the way that you talk about it, it sounds so hopeful. It sounds so smooth. But like, part of the reason that people stay in academia is because they might not be well supported. They might not be supported emotionally, psychologically or any of those other ways. But they are often financially supported, right? They publish it, they write grant applications, they have a salary and in doing that, it gives them some freedom and flexibility. Are you struggling? Do you feel like you're always under financial pressure or is this sort of crowdsourcing model the way to overcome some of that? I think because of the way we started out, it's been, it's, and it's really hard because people will ask me like other people that are, you know, trying to start nonprofits and they say like, tell me how you did it. And I'm like, honestly, I'm just making shit up. I got no idea. I can definitely, bold of you to assume that any of this has been planned or on purpose. I always tell people I am falling forwards. I was like, got out of academia and it's, I don't know how to describe it because if you've never been at what feels like rock bottom, like you don't know what it's like to be like, you know what? I'm getting out of here. I don't know what I'm doing next, but I got to get out of here. And you leave without a plan. There was no safety net because I wasn't afraid of falling because I was already, my hair was falling out. I like lost a ton of weight because I couldn't eat. I felt anxious all the time. I was like, this is bad. Like if I stay doing this, I'm not going to make it. Like my health has deteriorated. Everything is deteriorating. And so it was like, I gotta get out of here. I don't have a plan. But the plan is not this. And so kind of just stepping off of a ledge. And it's, it's, it's, I wouldn't even call it a leap of faith because a leap of faith implies that you like, you think there's something on the, on the other side of it. I didn't know if there was something on the other side of it, but I thought it can't be worse than this. And so that's kind of how that, how that went and, and whenever we, we launched and we raised all of this money, that told me, because I was thinking about leaving science entirely, but I happened to meet Carly, Amani and Jada at just the right moment in time. And that's when I said, wait a minute, maybe there's another way to do this. Let me try that. Everything else has failed. Why the heck not? So then we, we launched people were, funding it. People were excited about it. People were saying, I need it. And at that point, honestly, my thought was, I might be on my way out. But let me try to tear down as many of these things as possible on my way out. So it was, it was sort of like a kamikaze of, I might totally fail. I might end up broken destitute and gotta go crawling back to science place to live with my parents. But let's see, let's see how much of this system I can break down on my way to failure. It's originally where I, where I thought if I was going. And then everyone kind of rallied. And I think that people just needed someone to strike out. And go out of off the beaten path and prove that it was possible. And once that was done, everyone wanted to support us in that and support us going off and challenging the status quo. And I like to say that I think all of my power came from giving up because people are afraid to tackle these issues because they're afraid of getting black balls and losing their jobs and not being able to do science anymore because they got pushed out. I had already decided to leave. So it's a great power that held over. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, so many people are under that thumb. And yeah, getting out from under that thumb, you get all of the power back. But it is scary. It's very scary this free fall, this gamble of financial risk, this gamble of professional risk. How do you manage those days when you're, when you are in the unknown and when you're struggling to see the bottom line and say, oh, these numbers might not add up this year or gosh, I hope we're on the right trajectory. Yeah, I think that at first it was, okay, I will take all of this on myself. There was no staff besides myself in the beginning. And that was very much on purpose because I was like, if I can't make the numbers work, then that's on me. And I'm the only one that has to suffer from that financially. I don't have to worry about someone else not getting their paycheck. And, and for me, fortunately, I did have some cushion because I didn't have any debt because I went to college debt free because I got a scholarship. And my car was paid off. So I was like, cool, creditors won't come after me. Worst case scenario, I sell my house and I go live at home. It's just me and a dog. I just have to feed myself and my dog. I don't have a family. And so in that, in that way, I was very flexible where I could take the risk because it wasn't going to totally wreck me. Like, I was, there was never a risk of me being homeless. I do have parents that do have a spare bedroom that I could go back to if I needed to. And so that is, that is something that that I could do. And I feel like not everyone can do that. And so since I could, I said, well, let's see, it's a great experiment. And I'll take all of the risk on. And I will run miss. And it wasn't until I felt like, oh, yes, money is consistently coming in. I feel very confident that if I bring other people into this, I will be able to take care of them. And they are not assuming any risk by jumping on board that we started bringing in other people. Now when it was just me, I was wearing a lot of hats. I was learning as I went. I didn't know anything about money management of grants because at universities, you have someone that does that for you. There's always a little bit of a lead to person. There's usually a person or even, depending on the size of the institution, a whole department of people that handle grant funds and make sure you've got the reports done and make sure that everything is filed under the right grant and all of that stuff. I had to do all of that myself. Writing the grants, organizing the money, making sure that we are programs like we had all the liability insurance. And all of these things that other people, there's usually someone else that that's their job. It's usually not the job of the scientist to figure out. And so that was hard. But now I know it. And I feel like I know a lot of things about how entities operate, which I feel like is a strength that I know the ins and outs of pretty much every person's job at a university now because I had to do them all. That's incredible. And I'm curious because right, patriarchy, white supremacy, that doesn't stop at the door of the university. These are systemic problems. They're across all institutions. And so even leaving these traditional walls where it's so overt, where the pipeline leaks so much, where yes, we're seeing so many brilliant women of color at the bachelor's level. And fewer at the master than even fewer at the doctor. And there's like, you know, very few when we were looking at tenured professors and even administration. But still navigating applying for grants, navigating these large kind of, let's say, government institutions operating and doing science in a world where women and especially black women are often, you know, undervalued, under, not just undervalued. God, there's like a million words that we can fill in here. But people might not take you seriously. People might make assumptions about you. How do you navigate? I mean, do you find that it's a big difference now that you've left academia, that you're running into it less or it's just different? I run into it less at the personal level. Right. When I was in academia, I had to deal with people making microaggressions and macroaggressions, like directly to my face. Right. So all day, you're carrying that psychological burden of people being cruel to you, even without, like, even when it's an implicit bias, even when they think they're being nice to you, they're being cruel. Yeah, exactly. And so now it's more like the systemic level, which is still frustrating, but it's not something that I'm encountering every single day. So, you know, I get a grant back, you know, and the reviewers say something ridiculous. Like, oh, we don't think that this person has, you know, the experience or the the expertise or that we don't think this institution can handle this, you know, as Miss being a small grassroots organization. And, you know, occasionally I have the face-to-face interactions where I'm talking to grant officers and I say, well, have you thought about partnering with a larger institution? Right. And then they name some like white guy that I've partnered with and have my grants go through PIM. And I'm like, I'm sorry. No. Despite what you think, I am actually capable of doing what I say that I'm doing, but they're like, I don't know, you don't have a penis or a PhD. I don't know. I don't know. We can trust you. And so then at that point, I kind of just you know, I will hound and hound and hound and say things and I'm very vocal about problems. I remember one time I gave a talk at a conference about some of my like social science research about why retention of black and digits people of color is so low in marine science. And you know, one of the things that I said is a lot of people left the field of marine science because they had terrible research experiences as undergraduates. They either didn't have mentors or worse, they had mentors that abused them or mistreated them or they had an incident that happened and nobody stuck up for them. And I had somebody from the National Science Foundation, they raised their hand and they asked a question and they were like, well, I mean, this is very concerning because I'm the program manager for some R.E.U. programs and where these R.E.U.s and I just looked at her and goes, yeah, all of them. And she was like, what? This just doesn't make sense. And I'm like, it doesn't it because you don't have any way that you check on R.E.U. students. There's no way that they can report something if it happens to NSF. They have to report it to the institution and the institution just sweeps it under the rug because if they admit that something happened at their R.E.U. there's a chance that their funding for their R.E.U. might be taken away. Of course. There's no reason for them to report an incident. Yeah. And these incidents, clearly racism, sexism, it's a bad look, right? And so it always blows my mind when the way to avoid the bad look is not reform but covering up the bad thing. Like it doesn't it looks bad when when an overt act of racism or sexism or violence even occurs. How do you fix that? You punish the people. You change the culture. You reform. You do better. But no, so often the answer is minimize, cover up, sweep under the rug, maybe one or two, you know, fire one or two people sort of that nobody will notice and say we've we've now changed but then continue on with the status quo. It's interesting. And they never actually fire them. I know. They put them on like they put them on like paid leave and I'm like yeah, they built built be like oh this person has decided to step down and and that reflects, you know, so you you go to apply that person goes to apply to another institution and it doesn't show that they got fired. It shows that they left. And that's very different. And that's why we have people in the rare instances that people are removed from institutions. They're done it's done in a way that they can just go to another institution and go and abuse the same like you know the same way that they were because there's no there's no accountability to be like oh no, I fired this person. It's oh they they left. They've decided to pursue other opportunities. It's infuriating when we see systems that are so incredibly damaging. And I love that that the ownership that you take of it wasn't working. So I left and I started to model something that should work that will work. And maybe this modeling will end up having, I mean obviously it has an effect for as you mentioned like 500 of these incredible young women but also maybe downstream it will affect these institutions. But why should you have to say it have to be the martyr that says I'm going to continue to be abused in order to prove a point. I'm going to change the system from the inside. You know, it's it's always like a great fucking tagline in a movie but ultimately the personal cost of just taking it and taking it and taking and then trying to fight back within the institution and getting it two and three times over. Why is it that we glorify that so much? And somehow there's this I don't know there's this stigma around saying I left it's not because I quote couldn't cut it it's because I don't want to live like that. Why would I want to live like that? Yeah, I'm I'm a big fan of quitting. I tell everyone like there is no shame in quitting. Like you should never be it feel bad about deciding this isn't for me. And do you think that the culture I mean obviously I think that our culture is becoming even more and more bifurcated so you've got like the the rugged individualism was sort of manifest destiny awful awful supremacist like pull yourself up by your bootstraps culture that's just getting more and more dug in but let's say at least on the progressive side you know I think about the Olympics and I think about some own Biles and I think about how yes there are always people who are like she was a quitter but there is a whole growing movement of people going like how brave to prioritize your well-being over a piece of metal over glory over some pressure this like arbitrary thing like that is a massive culture shift isn't it? Yeah for sure and that's something that I really try to elevate when people talk to me especially people that are earlier in their careers than me and and they're asking well what do I do if I'm having this situation? You know what do I do if if you know I'm I'm having an issue where I'm facing racism or sexual harassment in my workplace and the thing that I always tell them is that in science people will have you believe that abuse is just the cost of doing business and that is not true like science should not cost you your well-being science should not cost you your health or security or safety that is not the cost of doing science and if someone is asking you to pay that cost that cost is too high and it's also not the only way to do it yeah and and people will will I've here I've here this time and time again I'll almost this literal phrase which is well if you can't cut it there's a whole line of people behind you waiting for a spot and it's this idea that oh this is so competitive everyone wants to do it so if you if you aren't willing to work for free someone is is if you aren't willing to put up with your advisor groping you someone is you know that that is that's the attitude that that is pervasive and trying to break that is is effectively just telling people over and over and over again that you don't have to take this there are people and places where you can go and work where you can feel safe and where you can have work life balance and even just presenting that as an option makes other institutions have to adapt because I mean we've had situations where you know we have a program and our program stipend is $5,000 and there's another program that's very similar to ours and they are they're not paying and people go well why the heck would I do your program when I could go do a miss program where I'm going to get paid and then they're like oh no miss is taking all of our people yeah and they're like well I guess we should start paying people and and even at the level of when people ask us to advertise jobs within our network I mean we have a huge network of people who are really fantastic and amazing and you could if you get your job in front of those people you get a huge boost to applicants and and so people will say oh can you post this internship can you post this job opportunity and we actually have a rule where we will not share anything where the salary or stipend is not clearly outlined in the description and we'll ask people you know oh okay so what's the what's the salary range for this position and they respond with oh well we don't share salary ranges and then I will say literally the only benefit to doing that is so that you can underpay people and it's a known fact that when you are expecting someone to negotiate women and people of color are treated differently in negotiations and that's how we have paid asparagus so tell me what the salary ranges so that people know and if you're just going to arbitrarily pick a salary I'm going to tell you that our members will lose out in that so why would I advertise that job to them yeah it's it's really facilitating I think a massive culture shift which has been so necessary which I've advocated for for a long time in in my training and my psychom work which is talk about money with your peers do not allow this cultural pressure which was who it's tacky who it's uncomfortable it's whatever those were all just approaches to keep you underpaid yeah talking with your peers about money is the way to make sure that the money is fair and a way to make sure that you're getting paid what you're worth but it's hard for a lot of people a lot of people really struggle with that because we've been trained our entire lives to feel shame around that yeah and and one of the things that we do at all of our programs for miss is we have this real talk session where people can ask us anything that they want and and we say there's there's nothing that's that's off limits here if you want to ask me how much I make if you want to ask me about my experiences with this person I'm going to I'm going to be honest with you because I think that that like you say if if you're not talking about it that's how people that's what people you know abuse and neglect certain certain people because they know that they don't have a network of people to tell them what their what their value is and so one of the things that we did very early on because we we had a partnership with with National Geographic to get more diversity on the shark shows and the first thing that we did is we pulled together a standard appearance waiver for all of our members we based it off of the people that I know that are very much involved in documentaries and things like that I talked to producers about what are the best appearance waivers that they've ever seen what points does it have on it and then we put an actual expected paid rate based on experience for our members and that was based on me literally reaching out to everyone I could find because I have no shame reaching out to everyone I could find on Twitter or on the internet and somewhere that had been on a show and asked them what their going rate is for their shows and I said it at the rate that white men are paid because because there was a huge disparity like like to the point where some people like women of color were doing shows for $500 and there was a white man on that same show getting five grand yep yeah this doesn't surprise me you know I worked as a television host for probably 15 years and we got to the point with my thank goodness for my agent being such a bulldog well we got to the point where I just didn't I didn't want to do shows unless they were favored nations right unless there was just in the contract that all of the people who have the same role get paid the same amount of money that's just how it works I'm doing the same job as this person we need transparency here it's just it's a it's a dangerous game and it's been played for so so long and we we very often have been on the shit end of the stick of this game and when I say we I'm a white woman I have like anordinate privilege even beyond and so you know I can commiserate with other women but we've all seen the studies over and over like you mentioned negotiation earlier the kind of classic studies from the 70s or 80s where a white man a white woman a black man a black woman go to negotiate for the price of a car and they net out the same every time white men pay the least then black men then white women then black women black women get the shit end of the stick culturally not culturally institutionally across the board and the work that you're doing is so fucking important and you know that you don't need me to say that to you but it is so important and I'm so grateful for people like you who like you said you don't have any shame and you're willing to really just push push push because that's what it takes yeah yeah and and I think that another thing that I always like to point out to to people is that I'm doing this because I want to I'm fighting this system because I want to and I always remind people that the expectation is not for you to fight it is not your job to fix other people's mess and and and I have taken this on because I feel passionate about it and it is my calling to do and I always tell all of the members that if you feel compelled to do that then go for it absolutely if it if it brings you joy to tear down systems in the same way that it does me then you should do that if it doesn't and it's stressful just do your job your job is to be a scientist you don't know anyone anything you don't owe them your blood your sweat your tears slavery is over we are done with that you don't owe people anything you did not break the system you're not in charge of fixing it so so that's what I tell people is that all of this is really a distraction there you know the systems are set up on purpose to exclude certain people and they know that by fighting the system you are going to do less you're going to do less science you're going to do less of other things because you're focused on this and so I always tell people that like you should just do science if that's what you want to do the other co-founders of myths they are rest as resistance they are doing science I I have decided that I am going to come on staff and I am going to work from from this they are still doing their science still on their trajectory and they are not in the trenches with me and we need people on both sides we need people that are refusing to play ball and going and doing the work their research and you know that is is a super valid approach to say no I'm not going to let you distract me with this I'm going to just keep doing science I have decided to step off of that path and I still do science I don't do it as much as if I had just you know totally focused on science but that I'm feeling fulfilled in what I'm doing and that's why I'm doing it and so I always think it's really important to share that message because I think sometimes with black women were like put on a pedestal if we spend our lives fighting and the black women are just as valuable not fighting what they're supposed to be doing absolutely you know I think like as we're a bit low on time but we haven't gotten to it yet this is a really good pivot point speaking of the science I would just love to hear from you maybe in these last few minutes what is it about sharks what is it about about this marine science that you are so passionate about that kind of drew you to it originally and that has kept it in your heart in your mind I mean sharks are just dope like they're super old they've been on this planet for 450 million years they were here before dinosaurs before trees before Saturn got its rings like they're here for the long haul and what's really cool is in all that time they haven't changed all that much you know they've had little changes they've adapted but like if you saw a shark 450 million years ago you would be like that's a shark unlike you know other animals where like everything is sort of evolving to be a crab just like be the come crabs um and like dinosaurs where the closest living relative to the dinosaurs a chicken and you're like what how what but sharks are like that's a shark that's still a shark that's still a shark it's a shark so I think that's really cool but also I'm driven by this um importance that they have in the ecosystem that's just really overlooked because of how much people fear and mistrust sharks and so I really just want sharks to have better PR people and I've decided that that's me um that's what I'm really interested in is like the ecology and evolution of sharks like what role do they play how did they evolve to do those roles how are they going to evolve as our oceans are changing largely because of human activity like who's who's going to be sharks that we need to watch out for because they're gonna face greater threats um who's doing okay the sharks that we are losing at an alarming rate what's gonna happen when they're gone what ecosystem service are they providing that's about to be removed uh because I like to know before the jingat tower falls like what is the piece that we should not let be taken out um so that's that's really what I'm I'm passionate about with with the sharks and I love doing research I love doing policy and conservation work I love doing science education I wear a lot of different hats but that's that's what I love I love to see the research all the way through do the research share that research with policymakers see it affect policy and educate people about it as well um so that's I just love that and I love my job I love being rogue it's the best decision I ever made even on the days where I'm like why why did I do this I'm like uh cuz cuz you love it you dummy and I just kind of like get up out of bed and I go keep doing it because I'm really happy doing it well and isn't that really the crux of all of this right like there are so many topics that we've covered in this hour there's so many different aspects of your work that we've been able to discuss there's so much left unsaid there's so much in the book that we obviously did not get to but ultimately I mean isn't the point to enjoy ourselves to have passion to find meaning to find purpose to love what we do and to not intentionally or maybe unintentionally allow ourselves find ourselves in these positions where we are I mean life is suffering we're all gonna suffer it's a terrible thing things always happen that are out of our control and there are systems in place that that cause suffering but if we have the opportunity to maximize that joy isn't that kind of the whole point of everything yeah I always say my two goals in life are to be happy and to leave the world better than I found it and I think I'm achieving that yeah I don't even know if I would say achieving I think probably I hope we don't lose you tomorrow but if we do lose you tomorrow I think you will have achieved that and that's really incredible especially being you know I don't know if so young so kind of at at a pinnacle in your career having so much more to do you've already done so much and I just want to thank you for you know a putting this all on paper which is not an easy task in and of itself so that you can share these ideas with us but be just all of the incredible work that you've done throughout your career and taking the time with us today to to share it with us thank you thank you so much for having me of course everybody the book is Sharks Don't Sink Adventures of a Rogue Sharks scientist by Jasmine Graham and everybody listening thank you for coming back week after week after week I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk to Mary Wee
