Hello everyone and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, August 26th, 2024, and I'm the host of the show, Dr. Cara Santa Maria. And as always, before we dive into this week's episode, I do want to thank those of you who make Talk Nerdy possible. Remember Talk Nerdy is and will always be 100% free to download. And the way that we keep this going is by relying on the support of individuals just like you. If you're interested in pledging your support on an episodic basis, all you've got to do is visit patreon.com slash Talk Nerdy to learn more. This week's top patrons include Anu Badawaj, Daniel Lang, David J.E. Smith, Mary Neva, Rika Maharaj, Brian Holden, David Compton, Gabrielle F. Haramio, Joe Wilkinson, Pascuali Jalati, and Ulrika Hagman. Thank you all so, so, so much. All right, let's get into it. This week I had the opportunity to speak with Dr. Charlotte Markey. She's the author of a new book called Adultish, The Body Image Book for Life. Dr. Markey is a professor of psychology and the chair of the Health Sciences Department at Rutgers University. And she has published over 100 book chapters and articles in peer-reviewed journals, often focusing on eating behavior and body image. She's also written a lot for sort of public communication of science and psychology across outlets like psychology today, US News and World Report, Washington Post, Science Daily, the Today Show, and so many more. Dr. Markey has also written several books, including The Body Image Book for Girls. Love yourself and grow up fearless. That was published in 2020 and being you, The Body Image Book for Boys, which was published in 2022. She's also co-edited a book called Body Positive, Understanding and Improving Body Image in Science and Practice. That's a more scholarly book. And then her new book, Adultish, The Body Image Book for Life, really does focus on the way we adults deal with these different types of pressures. It's an important time of life and we're not immune. So I'm really excited without any further ado to present to you Dr. Charlotte Markey. Well, Charlotte, thank you so much for joining me today. Thanks so much for having. It's funny. I don't think I have any friends in my life named Charlotte, but my mother's name is Charlotte, so it feels weird like using that name. I never call her Charlotte. I call her mom. What's her name? Well, I was named after my grandmother and to growing up, we were the only Charlotte I had ever heard of. Isn't that funny? Did anyone call you Charlie? No, but she was Grandma Shar and then I became Shar when she passed, I think, more often. But I love Charlie as a nickname. I wish that had caught on. My son was Charlie. Oh, I love that. Oh, keeping it in the fam. I love that. So I'm excited today to talk about your new book. It's called Adult-ish, the body image book for life. And before we dive into the topics in the book, which I think some will come out when we talk about your background, but I would love to get a little bit of info on sort of who you are, where you are in your research, kind of where your interests are. So we are both actually psychologists, which is fun. But you are a professor of psychology and you are a researcher and you've been doing this for a long time. Over 25 years, you started researching eating behavior and body image. And you've written quite a bit about that in the past, haven't you? Yeah, so yeah, my first study I published in 2000. So I've been doing research for a long time on these topics. And in my lab at Rutgers, we continued to do research that's very much focused on body image. We're looking at things like social media, influence on body image, body image and LGBTQ populations. And then my books I started writing a number of years ago, I guess at this point, was really an effort to translate a lot of this research to broader audiences. That there's just a lot of health and wellness information in public spaces. That's not exactly accurate or in sync with research. So that was my goal. I love that. And looking at sort of the evolution of your work and your writing, something stands out to me. And I think it's particularly relevant to me personally, but also in my work. And that's that like many individuals, when you talk about body image or you think about body image or you think about eating disorders, you almost immediately imagine young girls or adolescents, or maybe even young women. We kind of think about social media, we think about sports, we think about dancers and gymnasts and we think about all of the pressures that girls in this culture have on them to maintain some sort of beauty ideal. But then you also dug deep into the pressures that boys have on them. And now of course your new book is about the chapters in life that come later. And I think the reason that's particularly interesting and relevant to me is, I'm 40 years old, so like my body is changing and I struggle with that. But B, I work in a cancer center and very often I'm working with individuals who because of aging and or some combination of their treatment are dealing with the drastic changes to their bodies. And it's often a really large part of our clinical focus. Yeah, I think that you're exactly right. We have sort of a stereotype of young girls in particular being vulnerable when we talk about body image. But one thing I really hope to do through my books is normalize discussion about body image at every age and for all genders because there are different body image issues maybe for different groups of people. But there are issues for all of us. Like you say, it may have to do with illness or aging. It may be something that's more gender specific, right? When I worked on my body image book for boys, there was a lot more discussion with the people I interviewed and the research that I included on protein and concerns about masculinity and things like that that don't come up as often for girls frankly. But there's always something I think and yet we tend to I think sometimes as adults in particular feel like we should have outgrown this or it's no longer something we need support surrounding and I think that's pretty far from the truth. Oh, absolutely. And so for so many reasons, so many pressures, so much kind of internalized expectation and guilt and shame. And so I'm curious when you are doing this kind of research, are you mostly focusing on the sort of internal experience of individuals? Are you focusing on expectations and perspectives? And kind of negative self-talk? Are you also focusing on the societal messaging and kind of the external pressures? I really try to cover all of it because I think it's all relevant and I hate to sound dramatic or hyperbolic but I feel like body image is really a central component of our identities. And therefore it's not superficial and we need to really think of it in terms of a personal and psychological issue, in terms of a relational issue, in terms of a societal issue because there are these different levels of influence and there also are really significant consequences when people are dissatisfied with their bodies. Absolutely. I'm curious about sort of your personal perspective and your research and maybe clinical perspectives about pathology around this topic. I think very often psychologists, especially modern psychologists, have wildly different views. Some are very textbook in terms of pathologizing. They look at the DSM, doesn't have diagnostic criteria, can I check the boxes? Okay, that is a disorder and if it doesn't fit that box, then you don't have a disorder. But there are other people who are much more dimensional and this is an issue everybody faces and when it becomes so overwhelming or so extreme that it interferes with our lives, that's when we may benefit from help for these issues. I'm curious kind of where you are on that spectrum. I think I'm definitely closer to the latter in that we don't have body image disorder aside from body dysmorphia, of course, in the DSM. It's not that I want to take an everyday experience and pathologize it as much as I want us to appreciate that what a lot of people deal with when it comes to body image is not adaptive and could you support? That support may be at the one-on-one level, like some sort of therapy. It also may just be trying to help people appreciate that some of their habits and behaviors are not supporting them well, right? Like if you're scrolling celebrity culture and social media, that may be damaging to your body image. We have enough research, I think, to say that with some certainty at this point. So I definitely would approach this from us. This is taking up a lot of mental space. If this is making your life less than optimal, we should try to seek out resources and support. And maybe a book in some cases is enough, right? But maybe sometimes someone on one support is really warranted. Absolutely. I'm curious too, and this is coming from somebody who practices clinical psychology, right? So I do psychotherapy. But I often grapple because I'm much more like existentially oriented. I grapple with this sort of ethic, maybe ethics the wrong word, but oftentimes the, I don't know, the view, the thought process, whatever. Within the field itself, that the onus or the focus is so often on the individual. It's so often on cognitions or behaviors or changing certain patterns, which of course, people get into that because I'm not dismissing that. That's so important. But also there's this huge component that I think we don't often bring into the room, which is a social justice component, which says like, how is anybody supposed to have a really healthy kind of conception of self when they're constantly bombarded with shaming messages? And how can somebody be empowered? You know, there's a lot we can do at the individual level. But isn't there also engagement we can have at the societal level to try and change the actual culture that is, I would say inducing, maybe not even contributing to, but actively inducing a lot of these issues around body image. Right. And that's why in the most recent book, the eating disorders chapter, there's like a sub title to it that is eating disorders and a disordered world because I do want to really orient people towards the possibility that a lot of what they're learning from the culture around them is in fact disordered. Right. That it's not your fault at the individual level. If you think, for example, you know, fasting most of the day might be healthy. You're actually being told that by a variety of sources and yet that is probably a really bad idea in terms of both your psychological and physical health. So I do think that the context is incredibly important and I'll look by body image books with a chapter that tries to focus on that context in terms of how as individuals we can think about the society around us and maybe even try to change the society in small ways by approaching body image issues a little bit differently. And so let's get into that. You know, what are some of these approaches that we can kind of look at differently? You know, while it's true that we would all love to change the environment that we're in and that we can make, you know, some changes by organizing and by engaging. Ultimately, we live in the world we live in. And so, you know, tell me if I'm wrong, but it sounds like the sort of central theme here is less about, you know, change the way you act in the way that you think and then you will not have disordered thinking and acting about your body image and more like changing the way that we think and we act can help us transcend some of those negative messages and some of those pressures that we're constantly bombarded with. I think that's right. And there's a lot to be said for reframing some of these issues. And you know, I have multiple chapters in the latest book on just eating, right? Like how do we eat essentially? Because we get a lot of messaging about what is quote unquote healthy eating, that's not exactly on target in terms of what research would suggest. And a lot of this has to be reframed, I think, at the individual level, right? So eating is how we take care of ourselves. It's one way to nourish ourselves. And we should be allowed to also enjoy that process. It's not just this responsibility we have. It's not exactly the same as just putting gas in a car, right? That's just very functional. But we are not just functional beings. So I think that I try to really present information to people in a way that they can rethink it, right? Like if you think of eating as a form of self-care, as opposed to thinking about food as something you should avoid or only eat certain things or not eat it certain times, then I think it's a lot easier to approach yourself with grace and to try to enjoy food then as opposed to again, this sort of negative, like avoidance mindset. Yeah, which you're right, it does feel like that is the kind of overarching, cultural narrative is restrict, restrict, be careful, make sure you don't go near this, make sure that you're never doing this. It's not often about engage, enjoy, find joy in your experience with food. Yeah, I think so many people are essentially afraid of food and there is a lot of restrict or strain. You know, you're virtuous if you can do this. And the more I study these issues, the older I get, the more I think, wow, life is really short. This is really not the right way to frame this in terms of not just our enjoyment on a psychological level, but also in terms of, you know, this is a behavior we should be doing multiple times a day to sustain ourselves. And if multiple times a day, the framing is, oh, I have to be careful, I can't do this, I have to not do that. I can really take up mental space and feel much more oppressive than it needs to. So I really hope people who read my books and listen to me can try to just think about this a little bit differently, right? The dominant narrative of you have to avoid certain things or you have to do this certain ways, those narratives come from a wellness industry and a diet industry that makes a lot of money by trying to perpetuate those really myths about how we should eat. So you know, there's no reason for a lot of commercial interests to sort of back away from those messages. They make a lot of money off of our insecurity and our sense that we should be doing these things a certain way. So I think if you look at the science, which doesn't really have the same financial motivation, you'll see that, you know, reframing towards enjoyment and towards more flexibility and towards nourishment as both physical and mental can be really beneficial. Oh, absolutely. And I mean, I think about these messages and, you know, really peeling back that curtain of where are they coming from? What's the motivation here? You know, these wellness industry messages. And while sometimes we might be able to say, okay, they're a little bit forceful or they're a little bit negatively framed, they're a little bit restrictive, other times I think it's safe to say like this is rife or rank pseudoscience that there is like deep disinformation and misinformation that's potentially incredibly harmful. And it's very hard for a consumer to be able to differentiate between good advice and bad advice. And I think that only has become more true in recent years. If you think about it, it's really only been a little over a decade where social media has become such a widespread part of most adolescent and adult sort of daily lives. And social media, you know, there are certainly some benefits in terms of our availability or our ability rather to access information and to connect with people. So I am not only negative in my perception of social media, but it also gives a platform to anyone who wants it, right? You no longer have to be actually an expert in anything to develop a following. And that's a really interesting change in terms of how we access and consume health-related information, right? Because it used to be that there was more of a review process in terms of getting information in that, you know, if we write it in a newspaper, right, an expert was consulted or actual research was presented. And there's less and less of that now because so many people get information through varied sources, a lot of which just isn't reviewed at all. And so I do think that this is really concerning in terms of health and wellness information. Because as you say, it's, you know, just completely inaccurate. And can really lead to disorder behavior among people. Yeah. And I think in the past, like, or even today in the future, advertising has always existed, right? There's always been this like wellness industry, like we can look back to snake oil salesmen, like literally where that term came from, you know, so and so is litamin, and it's going to solve what else, yeah. And maybe there have always been people, or I shouldn't say maybe 100%, there have always been people who are like incredibly vulnerable and susceptible to that kind of persuasive messaging and who buy into it hookline and sink or this magic cure, I'm going to give you all my money. And that's always been a massive problem. And that still exists today. But I think part of the problem is we can't tell now what's an ad and what's not. We can't tell now what is a sales pitch and what is just somebody saying, hey, I don't know, this is this kind of work for me and I wanted to share it with you because I thought you might benefit from it. It's all very, I don't know, murky and mixed together. That's so funny. I was just going to use the word murky also. You're right. I mean, we talk about this in terms of concerns about adolescent health and wellness, but it's relevant to adults also because the murkiness is very real. And people often say to me, why do you write books like isn't everything on the internet now? And there is a lot of information on the internet. I use the internet also to access information. So I have nothing against the internet. But a lot of what we see it, like I said, it hasn't been reviewed. It hasn't been checked in terms of accuracy. And this is part of why I've been really passionate about trying to compile information in an accessible format and books because I think that a lot of us, we don't know what to do surrounding a lot of these issues, right? We don't know really like how to eat or we don't know how to think about some of these issues because we get so much information and a lot of it contradicts itself. So how do we get verify information? And as old-fashioned as books sound, some people think that they can be really good resources for exactly this reason. Oh, yeah. And when I think about the different pressures, the different issues, the different reflections that we have at different stages in our lives, the different pressures that sometimes are universal, but are other times very gendered and sort of the necessity of writing to that perspective. I want to kind of go back before we come forward and talk a little bit about, you know, you mentioned that boys, for example, and men have a lot of pressure on them to like have a certain physique, to have a certain level of strength to be very muscular. And girls very often have a pressure to be very, very thin and also, you know, culture changes, right? So like whatever the trend is of the day, like sometimes it's, you know, we used to call it hair when she, right? When I was growing up, like ultra thin, like ill looking. But then that can shift and change, for sure. But I think one of the things I wanted to kind of focus on for a minute at least was the way that we are marketed to and the way that the wellness industry blames and shames us for like normal, natural, healthy and in many ways, beautiful experiences and tries to make us feel dirty or less than, like literally they use terms like unclog your pores with this cleanser and, you know, D-Rinkle and like, A, 99% of the stuff doesn't even do what they say it does. Those processes aren't even evidence-based. But B, like your pores are supposed to not be empty. Like I don't know. There's just, I feel like there's so much there that is so internalized. We don't even recognize it's happening. And I mean, the perfect example of that is any sort of, you know, cleanse, right? When we talk about, it was kind of like a fad or diet, like cleanse. You know, we don't need to cleanse our bodies. We have kidneys in a liver and we have organs that help us excrete that which is not useful to us. And so it's just a made up idea, essentially. And I think it's very, you know, captivates a lot of interest because there's something intuitive about the suggestion that, you know, maybe I'm not feeling that good. So I want to shift my behavior in some way that feels like dramatic for a few days. And then I'm going to feel better, right? Like everyone likes that idea of kind of like a quick fix. I'm going to do those cleanse for, you know, a day or a week. And I'm going to feel better. And you know, I think I would even go as so far as to say that sometimes people will feel better and a lot of times that's a placebo, right? It's not really the cleanse. It's like, you know, maybe it has more to do with not eating what you were eating or, you know, just maybe you're so tired because you're not getting any real nourishment. You've slept a lot so you feel better. I mean, there's a lot of other explanations for why some people would find that helpful, but there's really no scientific explanation. And that isn't because we just haven't found it yet. I'm pretty convinced that there really isn't a scientific explanation. As to why we would benefit from cleansing our bodies in sort of the internal sense, right? Show where all you want, of course. But what is that kind of messaging due to a person psychologically being constantly told that they smell bad and need to smell better? They are dirty and they need to be cleaner. They are clogged up. They are, you know, all of these really negative terms that are just describing existing and actually invented, you know, like invented problems so that there can be now this solution that you have to spend a lot of money on and go through these rituals. What is that kind of pressure due to a person? Well, it can be incredibly distressing, of course, right? To feel like you've been made aware of this problem and now you have to fix it. So there's definitely distress that comes with it. One thing I think a lot about is just how much mental space all of this can take up. And maybe what would we be doing instead if we weren't worried about our pores or, you know, our internal stem needing to be cleansed or, you know, whatever hair now needs to be removed, there's always trends in terms of like hair removal or making your hair extended or, you know, whatever it may be, right? There's beauty trends that come and go and they require a ton of time and energy and resources. And I'm not saying we shouldn't ever engage in any of this because there's a certain amount of sort of cultural appropriateness about doing things that are good hygiene practices and that are regarded as, you know, just normative, right? Like wearing certain kinds of clothes to work, for example. And even that can feel like good self-care. I mean, there are definitely rituals that I engage in. I love to take long baths. I like to do a face mask when I'm in the, you know, and it's not so much that I'm like stressing because I feel dirty and I need to be clean. It's actually something that, you know, improves my psychological state. Right. I mean, my toenails right now are turquoise and I love that, you know? Exactly. And it's a fun color and it feels summery and I get enjoyment out of that. And it's not really for anyone else, right? So again, I never, ever want to come across as seeming like I think we should just disavow all of the ritual or potential benefit in some of this. And yet, I think we can argue that in part because of the marketing and the money involved in these products, you know, it can just start to really weigh on people. It can take up a ton of mental space. It can really then be a source of stress and even dysfunctional, you know, views about oneself in terms of self-esteem and body image and maybe even, you know, then result in disorder eating. And you know, when you think about it, like, what could you spend your time on instead? Right. I mean, it's not to say again, like, you shouldn't take a long bath. Do you enjoy a long bath? Excellent, right? I'm not saying anything negative about that per se. But if your long bath then became, you know, whatever other ritual and that starts to take up most of your evening, then as a psychologist, I would say, wow, we got to be careful here. Things have gone too far because now you're doing all these beauty rituals instead of connecting with like actual people. Like, do you want to spend time with your family and friends, right? Like those things are also really important. And there's only so many hours in one day. Yeah. And I also like to think about it kind of from the perspective of like, let's say that your mood was neutral. You had a euphemic experience. You were like perfectly content. And is doing this thing giving you joy? Is it taking an already good mood and improving it? Or is this some sort of frantic attempt to mask or to undo a lot of distress and distress? Is this kind of a frantic attempt to feel better about the thing that I'm feeling really bad about? All the time. And I'm having all this negative self-talk. And maybe if I do this thing, I'll have relief from that for a moment. I feel like those are two very different circumstances. One is potentially quite disordered and the result of a lot of this kind of pressure. And the other is like a very functional, adaptive and healthy way to engage with life. Yeah, I completely agree with that. And sometimes in the body image literature, we refer to adaptive and maladaptive appearance of investments. And it's not that everything can just be categorized in this sort of dichotomous way, or that you or I would even always have the same dichotomy per se, because there are some- Totally. Like I'm not a bath person for a variety of reasons. Right, so that would feel like a huge. And for me, I don't wear makeup. I hate makeup. I mean, I wear it like in ver- you know, if I have to go to a wedding or if I have like a really important thing, and then it can be kind of fun. But like if I had to put makeup on every morning before I went to work, I would be like, why am I wasting all this time? And for other people, that is a ritual that helps them feel ready for the day. It's like a really enjoyable time that they spend with themselves. And you know, they have a lot of positive kind of self-esteem that comes out of it. And I just- I don't get that. But I don't look at somebody who wears makeup every day and go, like, oh, she's disordered in her- in her self-perception. You know, like that's completely unfair. Right. And so again, you know, what's adaptive for me and makes sense in my life is not necessarily the same for you. And that's I think perfectly reasonable. There's a ton of nuance surrounding these issues. And when we talk about what's like a maladaptive investment in appearance, there are certain questions, you know, to ask yourself, like, who is this for? What is this for? You know, is the risk that I may be incurring if there are risks, you know, quote-unquote worth it? And is there any sort of evidentiary basis for pursuing this? Right. And so I think that, you know, your answers to those questions don't have to be exactly the same as mine. I think that there's there's some things we'd probably agree are kind of at an extreme and my wound, like, a maladaptive investment. And I put, frankly, most dieting approaches in that category because we have so much evidence to suggest that they're unlikely to be effective. They may do more harm than good. They can have long-term negative consequences, right? So even though people may not think of that as really extreme behavior in some cases, given just the strong evidentiary basis against them as health behaviors, I would call them maladaptive. But, you know, I also always say to people like, you know, if you found something that works for you and you're really sure it does, and who might I tell you what to do with your life or your body? Right. I also wonder if asking yourself, if I didn't engage in this behavior, this ritual, this, you know, whatever, if I chose to skip it for a day, would I be okay? Or would it cause me anordinate distress? Because that's probably a pretty good sign that something deeper is going on. Yeah, I like that. I think that makes a lot of sense to think about the motive for why you do the things you do, why we have these habits and rituals, and are they trying to help us achieve ideals that are impossible? Or is it more of a, like, self-care ritual? Is it something that you, as you've said, you know, we kind of enjoy, and it makes sense to us? So, there's just a lot of nuance when we come to think about our own bodies and what helps us to feel comfortable in our own bodies and what's really most adaptive in terms of both our psychological and physical well-being. So obviously, so much of what we are, you know, going to talk about today and continue to talk about is how to engage in behaviors that are adaptive, that are positive, that are beneficial, that are nourishing. But I think we, I think it's important, I guess, for, like, I feel a responsibility, at least for a moment to dig a little bit into, and I just love your perspective on this, for those who are listening right now, who are worried that they may be bordering on quite disordered behavior, or that they may have developed behaviors over the life span that are so distressing that they may need help to change them. Like, what are some indications, what are some sort of litmus tests that you might recommend? Like, how would somebody know if and when they need help? I mean, I think if you're asking that question of yourself, or, frankly, of somebody else even, then there's a good chance that health is warranted. And I also think that there are some misconceptions in our culture that one needs to be like, really far gone, right? Really have a big problem before we ask for help. And in fact, you know, sometimes health can just be proactive. Maybe you're just starting to experience some disruptions to your eating behaviors, and you're pretty certain you don't have a disorder, and you also are really certain you don't want to develop a disorder, and you want to get yourself some support. And I think that's amazing. That's great. There's nothing wrong with that at all. And I think though, you know, when we hit that point where sort of day-to-day life is suffering and your relationships are suffering, that's when we know we really maybe need to help. But I also think that, you know, some of this has to do with how comfortable we are as individuals and as a culture in terms of asking for help. And oftentimes we're just not good at that at both the individual and cultural level. Right? Like it's viewed negatively like, oh, you need help. And I think we have to work on that narrative too as psychologists that everyone needs help. There's nothing to be ashamed of. Everyone needs help at different times in their life. It may be different kinds of help. Sometimes it's professional. Sometimes it's from family. Sometimes it's from a physician. You know, but it's all help. And oftentimes we need it. And that's okay. Yeah, I love that. And also like this idea of sort of prevention or this idea of maybe even not prevention, but support as we develop healthy behaviors and as we develop healthy habits. You know, we might start to feel some shift, some change. We don't have to wait until, you know, our BMI is 14 or 40. We don't have to wait until there's, you know, somebody reaches out to us and says, hey, I'm worried about you. We don't have to wait until we're crying ourselves to sleep every night. Very often, then it's actually much harder to, I mean, and please, you know, if you are in that position, there is a lot of hope. And, you know, there is so much support out there. But very often it is more difficult to lay down new healthy habits and behaviors when we feel like we're at rock bottom. As opposed to like you mentioned, something feels off and I'm not feeling the same as I used to and I'm not feeling very good about myself. Like maybe now is the time to try and to let somebody that I care about know that I could use some additional support. Absolutely. And especially when it comes to eating problems, some of these disorders are just really incredibly chronic. And so when people get help earlier rather than later, we know the outcomes are better. And this is true of a variety of physical and mental illnesses, frankly, right? So earlier help is more likely to be effective and efficient, whereas if you wait, you know, years and suffer for years, not only is that years of suffering, but then we know that it's just going to be much harder maybe to recover. Not that one shouldn't try, of course, but I think that's just extra incentive to be thinking in a slightly more proactive way to be working to you know, appreciate again that seeking out some kind of help or support is not shameful. You know, I'm curious as somebody who has so much expertise in these areas, both in terms of sort of, you know, societal pressures and every single person on the planet struggles with those societal pressures, but also, you know, working with individuals who do have eating disorders, working with individuals or learning about some of the components that come from body image, disordered body image, and then disordered eating or exercising or, you know, rituals around body image, how much of our behavior and our kind of self-esteem, how much of it comes from or is related to, I guess I should say, a lack of control or some sort of attempt to regain control in our lives? I mean, I think we have to be careful not to oversimplify any of these problems. I think certainly there's an element of concern about control or a concern about, you know, trying to do something that at the outset may feel like a positive change, but, you know, mental illnesses as you know are really complex and so there's rarely just one primary contributor, right? It's rarely just like, oh, I was looking for some kind of control in my life and I started being more rigid about my eating behaviors, right? That may be part of the story, but the story likely is much more vast, right? That people who develop serious eating problems, we know even just have a genetic predisposition to do so very often, and that's completely beyond our control. So I think we have to appreciate that there's a lot that contributes to, you know, who we become, frankly, and that includes what illnesses we experience, and so, you know, approaching people for help with whatever we're struggling with, it's not our fault necessarily at all, right? It's not like we have a problem we created for ourselves. We were trying to gain control, or we were trying to cope with trauma, or, you know, we did something wrong, right? It's just much more complicated than that, and so we shouldn't, I think, think negatively about ourselves in the process of trying to get the support or help we deserve. I think that's a really, really important point, and, you know, there's this interesting sort of paradox here where, you know, we've been kind of talking about global pressures and issues, but also those that are often faced by young people, young people tend to be more engaged with social media, or at least spend significantly more kind of time on, like, newer approaches to social media, like TikTok versus Facebook, for example. Young people also tend to be the, I think, maybe not the least, but we do tend to see trends in a destigmatization around mental illness or mental health issues, more openness about seeking psychotherapeutic or psychiatric support. And so you, you almost have this weird paradox where older adults who historically maybe were less comfortable with the idea of mental health support, you know, what, I'm just curious, like, what are their triggers? What are they facing? Is it all the same kinds of messaging? Or is, are they sort of, in some ways, in a different zeitgeist or in a different cultural norm? Now, I definitely think that there are some cohort differences here. And as you say, younger people tend to be much more open-minded about discussing mental health, getting mental health treatment, using medication to treatment mental health. We've seen some really positive cultural shifts in terms of normalizing some of that. I think most adults, those of us, you know, steadily into adulthood at this point, didn't grow up in that sort of a cultural world where talking about mental health was quite as accepted or seeking out help was quite as accepted. And the interesting thing there is that, you know, oftentimes, kids need the adults in their lives to actually be able to access the help they may be more open to getting. And if adults haven't sort of come around to the possibility that this is a healthy way to approach sort of problem solving and growth in their own lives, then we may not be as supportive of the young people who are in fact, you know, ready to try this. So there are some interesting sort of generational shifts, I think, afoot. And if nothing else, hopefully it boasts really well for the years ahead in terms of people being more apt to seek out the help that they could benefit from. Oh, absolutely. And what about kind of right now, you know, older adults, yes, there may be more reticence to get help. But even, you know, before we get to the point where we're, you know, having support, do older adults have different pressures, different pressures on, you know, the body image that they are expected to maintain, different beauty standards? Like, what are we facing as we continue into adulthood and older adulthood that maybe young people aren't facing right now? Well, I think, you know, none of the beauty ideals are really of older people. So, you know, aging presents its own challenges, just in terms of looking older and being perceived as sometimes less in touch sometimes as well. I think those are real challenges as we get older. But we also start to be more susceptible to illness and functional limitations in terms of our bodies. And so, our bodies are, you know, in some ways the standards may seem very high when we're young, when we're teenagers in terms of, you know, wanting to look a certain way, but our bodies are optimally functioning very often. Not always forced, but very often, you know, and I don't ever like to frame it as like, and it's all downhill from there because it's more complicated than that. But there are harder. But it is harder for me. Like, if I had a certain quote-unquote, goal weight, which I can't because it's always shifting, like that's just not how I think about things, I don't look the way I used to. I used to be very naturally thin. And I look back and I know that was a privilege. It did not matter what I did. My metabolism did it for me. I developed horrible eating habits because it didn't matter. I still looked a certain ideal way. And as I get older, I realize, oh, I actually have to do things. And even then, I'm not looking the way that I used to look. And I think for a lot of people, you know, everybody has their different processes. That's a bitter pill to swallow. Well, it can be very confronting to appreciate that. In some ways, I think all of us get so much better with age, right? We have potential to be so much wiser, to have so much more life experience, to be more empathetic because we appreciate how challenging life can be at different times. So there's so much good that I think comes with aging. And then to juxtapose that with ideals of how we're supposed to present ourselves to the world, that become less and less obtainable can really be, I think, disappointing, right? It's like I feel in many ways in my late 40s, like I'm the best version of myself. Do I look like the best version of myself? By most people's standards, probably not. But why does that have to matter? I think that is a challenge for many of us as we age, just to try to reframe that and to try to be less tied to those sort of physical perceptions and impressions and to be more confident and accepting of ourselves in spite of our quote unquote imperfections. Yeah, I'm going to bring up a specific example because it's one that I often see in my work. But I think that it fits really kind of cleanly into some of these discussions that you have in the book. So when I'm working with folks who are going through cancer treatment, very often, we have an idea on television or in film of what somebody with cancer looks like. But very often that's somebody who's like caquecetic, you know, somebody with muscle wasting disease, who is very, very late stage and who is maybe actively dying. Most people with cancer have all manner of the way that they look. And often one of the things that happens with certain types of chemotherapy is actually weight gain. And it's not uncommon when I see patients who have gained a bit of weight on chemotherapy really distressed about this and saying, I just want to be thin again, I don't like having this extra weight. And of course, as their providers, we're often trying to remind like the extra weight is good. Like this is a good thing. We need this one. We're on chemo because you're barfing a lot and you need a lot of calories. And it's like really important that you have that additional, you know, nutritional stores. But it's a very tough thing for people to grapple with. I think because there are societal expectations. And then you add to that this, you know, I'm looking in the mirror and I don't recognize myself anymore. It's a really hard thing to work through. Absolutely. I mean, I think anytime we're confronted with illness, you know, maybe with the exception of like a quick cold or something, it can be confronting in that we are forced to appreciate, but our body is not functioning in the way that we want it to. Right? It's not looking the way we want it to. And there may be not a lot we can do about that. Like you say in the case of some of your patients, it's actually good for them to be gaining weight. Right? That's probably supporting their survival in that moment. And yet we've been so brainwashed, societally, to think that it's important to be thin, no matter what, that it feels like a negative. And in some ways, you know, that's incredibly sad. And I think really you requires that a lot of reframing in terms of the importance of trying to keep our bodies functional. Right? They are not just ornaments. Our bodies are instruments and they allow us to live in the world. And we have to protect them. And at certain points in our life, that's going to mean probably gaining weight. And we don't have to love it. We don't even have to like that. Right? But I think we have to work on being a little more accepting and offering ourselves more grace when it happens. Because for most of us at some point, it will happen. Absolutely. You know, I'm curious, sitting down to write a Dulltish and to start to shift your focus on this kind of developmental period that often is ignored when we talk about body image, when we talk about societal pressure, when we talk about, you know, looking in the mirror and being kind to ourselves, softening that negative self-talk, maybe even enjoying what we see and celebrating what we see. What are some of the things that you like some of the central things that you really hope to communicate to an older audience? You know, what are some of the things that when when somebody picks up this book, you hope or some of the main takeaways. I really hope it helps to foster some self-acceptance, to help people appreciate that really we're all sold a whole bunch of messaging that suggests that we can aim for this perfect ideal that doesn't exist. And the fallout of that is really significant and we need to not let ourselves be misled by all that messaging. It's just incredibly dysfunctional and we want to try to work on really embracing ourselves both physically and psychologically, right? So we all are unique in how we both look and how we are internally and instead of feeling negatively about that and trying to conform, there's a lot of benefit to trying just to appreciate what we have and working on more acceptance. But I also don't want to make it sound too tried, right? Like just love yourself because I appreciate that it's it's much more complicated than that. That's why I ended up with you know, it's a 250 page book that originally was a 350 page book and my editor was like, okay, you got you got to really do some cutting here because this stuff just gets incredibly complicated. It's so hard to summarize for me and sound bites because I think that these are lifelong journeys for many of us, right? So are coming to terms with with a sense of self that that feels good to us. Absolutely. There is there's so much nuance. There's so much gray area. You are you know, comfortable spending your time in that gray area and really I think reinforcing that these are personal and individual, you know, within the context of the culture within the context of sort of interpersonal, but but that each unique individual is going to have their own journey and they're going to have their own pressures and their own struggles. And that so much of this is about finding like you said kind of a sense of self that maybe includes, you know, a sense of identity that includes some of these components but is not defined by them, you know, that that there's so many other components to who we are that collectively, right? We are, we contain, I guess, multitudes that collectively help us have a healthy sense of self. And I just really appreciate the amount of work that you've put into this. It's a beautiful book by the way. It sort of feels like and tell me if this was your intention or tell me if you feel like this is a mystery, but it doesn't feel like self-helpy. It feels sort of like a mix between the type of manual I might use in therapy with one of my patients and a very self-guided, you know, very information, rich book that would help me personally on my journey. It's got it's got a little bit of both in it. Yeah, I mean sometimes I laugh because I feel like I didn't really set out to become like a self-help book writer. Like I'm a researcher by training, you know. And yet to a certain extent, of course, the body of which books are our self-help books, but I think what's important to me is to really try to hand information to the target readership in a way that's accessible and not just be prescriptive, not to say like you need to do a B and C, but essentially to try to tell the reader like I trust you to take this information and then try to make it work for you, right? Like there is this nuance. There isn't just a manual I can write with a list of steps. I can offer some advice and I can tell you what the research says and I can try to provide, you know, myth-busting is one of my favorite parts of these books, right? I can try to tell you why things you believe may be wrong. But ultimately I think people need to come to their own sense of what makes their own comfort in their skin possible. And so yeah, I think that your perception is not inaccurate, right? I wasn't trying to make it just your standard self-help book. And I take no credit for the actual physical design of it, but I am overjoyed at how it turned out. I love our illustration and design team on this book in particular. I think it reminds me almost the like Matisse cutouts that were very famous towards the end of his life and the artist kind of has that style of like these cutout pieces. And I think it's also very symbolic of like we're all composed of these pieces and how do we make them kind of fit together and work for us in some sort of harmonious way. Oh, I love that. And it's true. There is a very kind of joyful aesthetic to the book. It's very readable. It's very like intentional in its page layout and its design. And it, I don't know, I feel good with it in my hand. And I think that actually, you know, there's power in that. So all in all, I just want to thank you for, you know, for the research that you do for this sort of, you know, lifelong career digging into these, these issues and helping us learn about them more for taking the time to put together this beautiful and really informative book and for spending this hour with us today. Oh, well, thank you. I really appreciate that. And I hope that, you know, the book is a good resource for people. And like you say, if nothing else, it looks nice. But it's also something else. Yeah. But no, I mean, I think, you know, sometimes having some nice things in our life can bring us some joy as well. Absolutely. You know, everybody, the book is adultish, the body image book for life by Dr. Charlotte Markey. And everybody listening, thank you for coming back week after week. I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk to everybody.
