Hello everyone and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, February 17th, 2025. And I'm the host of the show, Dr. Cara Santa Maria. And as always, before we dive into this week's episode, I do want to thank those of you who make Talk Nerdy possible. Remember, this show is and will always be. I always say it will always be as if it's going to be on air forever. Gosh, I'm not promising that. But as long as I'm able to make it, I want to make sure that it is free to download so that any individual who wants to listen to the show has access to it. But obviously, it costs money to make this show. And so I'm just really, really grateful for those of you who basically donate to be able to offset that cost for other individuals. The platform that I use is Patreon. I highly recommend you, if you are going to use Patreon, that you do it via the website, the desktop website, and not via an app through the app store, because they take a cut when you do it that way. So if you are interested in pledging, you can do it as of right now, still on an episodic basis. As always, I want to thank those of you who are the top patrons this month. They include Anu Badawaj, Daniel Lang, David J. Eastmith, Mary Neva, Brian Holden, David Compton, Gabrielle F. Haramio, Joe Wilkinson, Joseph Lamore, Pasquale Jalati, Rika Maharaj, and Ulrika Hagman. Thank you all so, so very much. All right, let's get into it. So this week, I had the opportunity. It's quite a relevant topic, even though it's a historical topic. I had the opportunity to speak with Dr. Lin Hunt. She is a distinguished research professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, UCLA. Really the eminent historian of the French Revolution. She's written numerous works, including inventing human rights and writing history in the global era. She's a former president of the American Historical Association, and she has a new book out. It is called The Revolutionary Self, Social Change, and the emergence of the modern individual, 1770 to 1800. So without any further ado, here she is, Dr. Lin Hunt. Lin, thank you so much for joining me today. Well, thank you so much for having me. I'm delighted. I'm excited to talk about your new book, The Revolutionary Self, Social Change, and the emergence of the modern individual, 1770 to 1800. So as a historian and your area of interest, although broad, you have a lot of specialization in the French Revolution. Is that correct? Absolutely. So I'm curious, you know, as an academic, as a scholar, you teach, you do research, and you've written obviously quite a few academic papers for, you know, colleagues and individuals within the scholarly community. But you've also written some of these trade publications, these publications for broader audiences. How is it different for you writing for the different audiences? That's actually a really interesting question, because I think more and more professors in the ivory tower want to do that, but we aren't really trained to do it when we're in graduate school. In graduate school, you're trained to write things to satisfy your professors, and not to make things accessible to a broader public. But that's changing now. And, you know, really, I learned a huge amount about this from my various editors over the years, starting with, surprisingly, a textbook editor, who was very clear on how you had to make it flow in a way that, in this case, an 18-year-old, just out of high school, could follow why you were saying what you were saying. So really, I learned how to do it from the editors that I've worked with. I love that. And so since then, you've written about a variety of topics. Tell me what brought you to the book that were, you know, really focusing on today, the revolutionary self. You know, I've always been interested in this fundamental question of the relationship between an individual person and society. And what it is, we think society or social things are. And one of the things, of course, that intrigued me most as someone who had worked first and foremost on the French Revolution was, why does this become such a big issue just at that time? What is it about a revolution happening that makes people more aware of society? So it was an ideal place for me to start thinking about that. But it was also a very general question because it's something that we very much worry about still, which is, do people do things because of things inside themselves that they have control over? Or do they do things because they're socially conditioned by their parents, by their family, by their community, by their class, their race, their sex? All the things we think of as social markers, do people do things because they're socially conditioned? And this whole issue of whether we're free to act or we're actually conditioned to act is something that we very much think about still today. Absolutely. It's interesting because this very fundamental question is one that I grapple with regularly as a clinical psychologist and somebody who's interested in human behavior from that kind of academic and practical perspective. And my training is in the more kind of in the existential humanistic tradition. And so these important questions about, you know, does existence proceed essence? Is there really a human condition or do we adapt to how we are, you know, treated, how we are taught from the time that we're born and then recapitulate those themes throughout our lives? I think it's an important question. And as you mentioned, not only still to this day, but I think, is it as important as ever right now because I can imagine that as a scholar of the French Revolution, you are seeing lots of parallels between the political strife that we're experiencing here in the United States right now and a lot of what you have studied academically. That's absolutely true. And I would say two things about that. Yes, it is very much still on our minds. Why do people make the choices that they make? Do they have too many choices? Are the choices really meaningful and in what ways are they meaningful? But a second thing interesting to go back to what you brought up about your own background and training, I think one of the reasons I was so interested in this was that even as a teenager at the end of my last years of high school, for some reason, I was busily reading Eric from and Karen Harnay and the ego psychologist who were very much interested in this question of, is there free will? Do individuals actually have freedom? So it's actually been something on my mind. I suspect because I was very worried about it as a teenager. Why do I do the things that I do? And can we ever actually escape from our social conditioning? I love that. It really is in some ways, I don't want to say it's an unanswerable question because there is so much information out there, but I did have Robert Sapolsky on the show several months ago and he wrote a book all about the concept of free will. And I'm still not satisfied with his argument, but it's one that's still fun to continue to have. And so it's interesting that these fundamental human ideas that you're grappling with, but you're grappling with them situated in a particular time where they feel very, very relevant. So maybe you can give us a little bit of background about what is going on between 1770 and 1800? Well, so first of all, what people have most noticed in the past is that in that period of time, there is really a remarkable interest and increasing emphasis on personal autonomy. This takes place in the law. So for example, during the French Revolution, they take away the virtually absolute powers of fathers over their children. They lower the age of majority and they give grown-up children, that is what we would call beginning adults, much more power to choose who they want to marry, to choose the occupations that they're going to follow, all of which things had been very much controlled by families in the past. So we knew already at the end of the 18th century, there was just much more emphasis on the autonomy of the person, especially the male person, but even the female person, and because women were very much featured in novels at the end of the 18th century, even in the middle of the 18th century, and women were featured precisely in tragic stories about autonomy. So we knew that there was an interest in personal autonomy. What I think was less seen previously, and this is where I would like to take some credit, is that there was, at the same time, this growing interest in what is society, how does it shape us? And part of the reason for that is that there's a pulling away, not from religion itself, because people are still very much religious, but from explaining the world entirely in religious terms, in terms of original sin, that's why people are bad, because of original sin. Now increasingly, it's people are bad because of social conditioning. So then you have to study what happens then, as you think about, well, what is society? And why are societies different? So at the end of the 18th century, you have the rise of thinking about comparative civilizations, and I have a chapter on that, and then you also have really the invention of the idea of social science, that you can study society, and you can figure out what makes societies work, and what makes societies not work, and of course, the French Revolution is incredibly important in that, because you have the example of what people try to overthrow the existing society, they abolish nobility, they abolish the monarchy, and they try to set up a new kind of society. So of course, then that means intellectuals and scholars have to think about, well, why is that happening? What does that mean? What are the rules that organize society? And so there's a kind of crystallization of thinking about society, as something that shapes our lives. I can imagine and correct me if I'm wrong, but I can imagine that this kind of newfound interest and development of the social sciences is also happening against the background of an honoring or an excitement about the physical sciences, that there's a lot of, emphasis being put on experimentation, being put on documentation, being put on, hey, we can manipulate variables, and we can pull data from that. Why can we not apply this to other areas of our lives? That's such a stoot thinking through of this problem, because that's absolutely right. So famously, for example, Adam Smith, the sort of inventor of classical economics, and one of the great thinkers of the late 18th century, many of his followers referred to him all the time as the Newton of the social, not of the social sciences, that they were calling it that exactly, but the Newton of thinking about the world we live in outside of the physical sciences. So he was going to be their Newton, because he was discovering the laws that made the economy work. So there is absolutely a sense that if science can reveal this much about nature, why can't a social science reveal similar things about society? Now interestingly, over time, I think we're less convinced that economists and sociologists and anthropologists and historians have really kind of cracked the code in quite the same way that we think that biologists and physicists and astronomers are cracking the code of science. That might be an unfair comparison, but it is certainly the case that in the 18th century and ever since then, that's been the hope. Yeah, I would agree with that, and I would point to also within the sciences more of an understanding that actually much of what we thought of as very hard and sort of unequivocal investigation is more like the social sciences, and we really only can point to these laws in the most extreme cases of cosmology, but even in biology and chemistry, we see more and more that people do science and people are flawed. You're so right about that. I mean, especially historians and sociologists of science have shown us how embedded in social relations, scientists were, and in fact, how what science has found out for us, which is incredibly important, I don't want to minimize it in the slightest, is itself always in the process of revision. Even Newton's laws of gravity were revised by Einstein to pick some of the most famous examples. So in fact, we do change our minds over time, over science, but scientists somehow manage to keep more of an aura of what we really do is objective, whereas what the social sciences do is really kind of more subjective. Right. It's interesting. You mentioned economics. You mentioned Adam Smith, and I'd love to spend a few minutes kind of talking about the relationship between a society, and maybe we could say it's governing practices and it's social norms and an economy, which is in many ways sort of inextricably linked from a modern society or to a modern society. That's a really interesting question, and I had to confess I don't really do enough with that in my book. There's no question, for example, that the increasing role of trade and commerce, both inside societies and between societies in the 18th century. It's really a vast expansion of global trade, for example. There's no question that that has some relationship. It's not entirely clear exactly how it works with this emphasis on personal autonomy. That is, people are able to buy more things, and somehow that translates into people have more choices. I mean, we understand economically how they have more choices, but it then translates interestingly into the idea that people are individuals who make choices. That choice, i.e. autonomy, is somehow essential to being in the world, and that that should be emphasized more. There's no question that the growing global trade and growing internal trade somehow relates to that, but it's very hard to say, where's the tipping point? Because trade has been increasing since at least as far back as the 12th century. So is it just that it's a little bit by little bit by little bit, or is there some tipping point in the 18th century? Now, in my book, obviously, I consider the consumption of T, which really takes off in the 18th century to be a tipping point that has all kinds of social consequences. So there's a place where there is clearly a relationship. It's an interesting area, frankly talking for myself, I didn't want to get bogged down in arguments about whether personal autonomy is the direct consequence of capitalism, because that gets you into all that. I just didn't want to get into that, because it seems to me that I would have to explain, well, since the economy has been being more and more commercial since the 12th century, where does that, where's the changing point? And also, how can you really extricate these variables? They're so intertwined to be able to point to some sort of causal relationship, is I think kind of a monumental task. Right, right, right, exactly. And especially since it would be, it's not even clear empirically how you would do that. What would be the level of commercial interaction and how would you measure it that would prove to be a tipping point? Not obvious how that could be done. Absolutely. You know, on a different but sort of related attack, I'm curious about this idea that, you know, we're talking about sort of globalization, we're talking about imperialism a little bit, we're definitely talking about questions about sort of in-group out-group our society and how is our society different than the society of others? And of course, decidedly when we're talking about French culture, there's a Western bias here, but this was an era of exploration, it was also an era of deep kind of racism. This was, you know, the precursor era to like the concept of the human zoo. And like when we read a lot of sociological, what we might now call sociological texts from this era, there's a deep curiosity, but definitely a kind of white male superiority perspective when describing sort of us versus them. And I'm curious how much that kind of came into play in your writings and your grappling with this question about the self. It's a very important question and of course it inevitably came up because right away at the beginning of the book I talk about the invention of the idea of civilization by white Western males, it does have this paradoxical side to it. So you develop the concept of civilization because you're looking around the world at the way other people organize their societies and you're saying, first of all, other people don't organize their societies at all in the way that we do. The way we do it is superior and what is the sign of that superiority they argue when they talk about civilization is the status of women. Women are much freer in modern commercial societies than they are in the other primitive and backward societies that we see in the rest of the world. So women become important as a marker of civilization, but underneath this there are two things going on, I think in a subterranean way. And I don't talk about this perhaps enough a little bit about one but not the other. And that is that first of all, the comparison shows that other people are able to organize societies perfectly well without Christianity. And this is actually a blow. This is a blow because Westerners had grown up with the idea that Christianity or at least Judeo Christianity was absolutely crucial to the success of their societies. Other societies didn't need this. What did it mean? And could there be an absolute religious truth if everybody around the world had different ideas about what constituted God or even if there was a God? First of all, so that was a challenge. So they immediately rushed to, you know, we're superior. There's no question that we're better. Then the second thing is if the sign of civilization is the status of women and their relative freedom, then why shouldn't they have even more freedom? That will be a question that will come up in the 19th and 20th centuries. And there's of course still an issue to our day. So there's no question that they kind of gather this material about other places and forge it into a narrative about Western superiority. But it has inside of it questions about what really is essential to Western life. Other than let's say commerce. If you're okay with it, let's look at those two concepts in a little bit more detail. Maybe starting with this question about religion and especially Judeo Christian ideals. Obviously, as these intellectuals and thinkers are looking around the world and they're seeing that there are cultures that are more spiritual in nature. There are cultures that are polyphistic. There are cultures that are sort of, shall we say, deistic or even a theistic. You know, what kind of a blow is that? How do they grapple with that? Is there just a, oh, well, we're clearly better because we have the one true God? Let's be real. It's a huge issue. It starts off as an issue mainly for intellectuals. But then it will rapidly percolate down into the merchant classes of lawyers, doctors and even even into artisans and shopkeepers because because the recognition that other people's, this is especially an issue with China because everyone in the West recognizes that, okay, the Chinese are super different, but what's shocking is they have records that go back further than Western records, written records. And they have records that go back before the time of Jesus and even the time of Moses. So this causes a huge issue. There's all these people in the rest of the world who have never even heard of Christianity. And so how is it that Christianity can be God's kind of exclusive truth? If it's so limited once you discover that there are all these other people in the world who have completely different belief systems. And then the Chinese in particular are a big problem because we now know in the 18th century the Chinese were just as prosperous as the Western European countries and they had an enormous military and they had a very vibrant economy. And in what sense really was the West superior for the Chinese who were, after all, providing porcelain and tea which the West until later on was unable to produce for itself. And we're now considered the height of refinement porcelain and tea. So this is a serious, it's not like in one day in 1777 everyone thinks this, it's a slow process. But the more that is learned about the rest of the world and the more trade brings things in from the rest of the world, the more there is a kind of subterranean underground river of, as possibly going to undermine the foundations of your feelings of superiority. I can't help but see the parallels today. This sort of white Christian nationalism, this holy war that America is backing, this evangelical positioning in the world in terms of superiority with the current administration and this massive threat that they see again, China being as a sophisticated producer of intellectual information and technology. Place that produces all of the cheap consumer goods that we rely on in daily life. Let's be real, you cannot buy, I just bought an incredibly cheap standing lamp. Whereas it made, of course, it's made in China because they can do things more cheaply. But then if you combine that with the recent revelation that they've developed an AI that is better than the ones that we have, then you realize, oh yes, this is going to be an issue because the fact is the Chinese government has poured staggering amounts of its revenue into the development of technology. They started, by starting by sending hundreds of thousands of university students not just to the United States, but to every advanced economy in the world to find out how things are done and take it back home. It's just, it's so interesting. I went to China, the only time I went to China was a very long time ago. I went in 1985 as an exchange professor from Berkeley, from University of California, Berkeley to Peking University, as the Americans used to call it, to Peking University, where I talked seminars on the French Revolution. But 40 years ago, they were so far behind that when a friend came to visit me, they only were willing to give her a visa because she was a scientist. If she brought cell media with her in a cooler on the airplane. Wow. Because they didn't have that much access to things like that. Now they have a formidable scientific establishment because they are putting money into it constantly. The BSS, that's their goal. And it shows that if a government puts money into science, you can leapfrog over all these other people. Yeah. And I can't help but put point to this kind of fundamental comparison, this fundamental questioning about these Judeo-Christian values. I personally, whatever, it doesn't really matter, but I personally am an atheist. I see this a lot with my colleagues as well, but not all. Psychology has a rich tradition of people from a lot of different perspectives. But I can imagine that whether we're talking about revolutionary France or whether we're talking about sort of 2025 America, that superiority sort of complex of Judeo-Christian values is deeply threatened when you see an organized culture that is producing things that are kind of like superior products that have superior technologies. It's very threatening to think that somebody could get there atheistically. Yes. There's actually a huge argument in the 18th century about whether the Chinese, whether Confucianism is atheistic or not. Yes. But it's definitely not Judeo-Christian. We can say that. Yeah, definitely not Judeo-Christian. No, that's why there, you know, things that are happening now have had us an incredibly retro feeling to them. Do you not see how the world has changed? But you know, we'll see, I mean, the fact is whenever things, this is the way history tends to work. And this is something I was always interested in about the French Revolution, which was you have something as radical as the French Revolution. And then you have an incredible period of reaction to it because people are just a guest at the idea that you can, you know, go from having a hereditary monarchy to having what is supposed to be a democratic form of government literally overnight. Yeah. And this just is so threatening to all the monarchical regimes at the time that they just, they have to fight the French for the decades that they fight them because it is an existential threat to have to have such a radical government in their midst. I think it's important this point you make about the reactions to these large social swings, because I would argue that the Trump administration is exactly that. It is a, it is a deep reaction to the sort of social justice-oriented era of the Obama administration that there was a big, big push from sort of a traditional white male supremacist Christian, you know, nationalist view that this cannot stand and that we have to sort of swing back into a more, I guess we could even say all a gargical perspective within the constraints of democracy, although right now, of course, even democracy itself is kind of in a crisis. But we do, we see these huge shifts, and we wonder why those swings happen. Well, they must be reactions, right? Right. Right. Well, this is one of the things that I've always been interested in studying the French Revolution, because the French Revolution doesn't just produce the monarchical reaction, but it also produces the intermediate stage, which is now much more dominant of authoritarianism. What does the French Revolution first produce? It produces Napoleon Bonaparte. So, but yes, so this is the thing, is that radical social change, and in some ways we did experience radical social change by having the first African-American president. Radical social change always brings about reaction, because usually the people who want change are not always, and perhaps always not usually, the people who have the most power. Right. Other people who have been oppressed the most usually. Right. Right. Right. Well, they have support from other people too, but yes, they are the ones who have been oppressed. And so there is a kind of like, you have to be kidding me that this is going to, that this is going to be allowed to happen, that, you know, people who are supposed to be on the bottom of the scale are not going to be on the bottom of the scale. And that's very, that is very similar to the French Revolution. There's a racial component in the French Revolution, it's not nearly as significant as in our lives today, but definitely the class component is heavy. Right. Right. And even the racial, even the racial component comes up, because the French Revolution is, the French are of course the first people to abolish slavery back in 1794, long before the United States abolishes slavery decades, decades, decades later. That's so yes. And that is, that is also part of that is also part of what the reaction is against is the dismantling of those kinds of systems. But usually reaction runs its course. If your job at a healthcare facility includes disinfecting against viruses, you know prevention is the best medicine. And maintaining healthy spaces starts with a healthy cleaning routine. Granger's world class supply chain helps ensure you have the quality products you need when you need them. From disinfectants and cleaning supplies to personal protective equipment so you can help deliver a clean bill of health, call 1-800-GRANJER-CLICK-GRANJER.COM or just stop by. Granger for the ones who get it done. That does lead me to that sort of second component which is complicated to me. And so I'm curious if we can grapple with it a little bit. This idea of a free society being one where women are empowered because obviously even during this era where let's say the French philosophers and thinkers could look around and say look how free our women are compared to these other cultures, there was still a patriarchal structure and there was still a male supremacy. And so it's, it's almost, I don't know, there's like a paradox kind of happening here. Like look women, the freer women are the more sort of sophisticated in advance of society but also let's not let them get too free. Yes, there is definitely that feeling that let's not let them get too free but it is true that in the French Revolution what sets the background in part for women being able to do more things is that they do dismantle the more striking aspects of patriarchalism which is one of the things that Napoleon Bonaparte of course brings back with authoritarianism is to re-institute patriarchalism in the workplace and in the home. So you know one of the most radical things that the revolutionaries do which has actually lasted more or less to this day is that they declare that all children must inherit equally and that the property not cannot go just to the oldest son. And that means that women inherit property which is really very different from a lot of other places at the same time. So they do do some, they do do some radical things and one of the things that I was interested in in my book is that women are able to do more things in this period and not just men. I do talk about men being able to do more things in the army and in the economy but women are also able to do more things and in the example I use in my book is a is a female painter who comes from a very modest social origins and who would never have been able to achieve the kind of reputation and success that she achieved without the opening up of the art scene which is another one of the things that the revolutionaries did was to take away the monopoly of the academy on public expositions and open therefore to anybody who wanted to submit their paintings and that would be accepted by the jury and many many many many more women were able to exhibit during the French Revolution than ever before. You know it is interesting when I even think back and I'm not a historian by any stretch and I often struggled with history because I struggle with chronology in my mind but when I think back to some of the most affecting on me personally women scientists women philosophers women thinkers from multiple areas many of them were French and I can imagine that that has it sort of roots in the fact that there was an opening up of society kind of earlier than in in some other Western cultures. That's certainly not just due to the French revolution you know the model of female conversation in a mixed company even for the Scottish philosophers was France and in particular Paris was seen as a place where people of very different backgrounds but especially of the two sexes would converse together about just about anything and that this was an important part of social life even before the revolution this is true but it's true that during the revolution then you do have a women who become important figures I'm thinking of Madame Roland who was the wife of a minister but who basically organized political conversation in the early 1790s in Paris and then of course Madame de Stal who became one of the most famous novelists but also wrote histories and criticism and was an incredibly important intellectual figure always having the men in her conversational circles not it was certainly not just women but being considered an intellectual equal. And I can imagine and maybe I'm completely off base but I think when we think about stereotypes of historical France we also think about sex work and we think about single women and women having a little bit more economic power as well. Right, you mean in terms of actually working. Yeah or you know we when we think of kind of I don't like to use the word prostitution now because I think it's quite pejorative but when we think of sex work like modern sex work I think we often think about kind of France of of bygone era this kind of you know stereotype of sex workers but these are independent women who are making their own money at a time when probably it was not as easy to do. Right and also of course the French are notoriously lacks on this on this subject in the sense that they then invent a little bit later than this period they invent basically state control of prostitution in the sense that not repression of it but allowing it to exist as long as the state had some sort of sense of control over it what they didn't they didn't like a sort of independent street walking they liked brothels that they could have the police the police would then have brothels would pay money to the police for protection basically. And so we associate that with France because there's then that goes along with this long tradition very long tradition actually of men and women conversing together no separation like port and cigars after dinner in England this was not the way it was done in France it was mixed conversation throughout and and that had that had an important intellectual influence. Oh yeah yeah women thinkers women scientists women philosophers women yeah like if women are existing in the spaces where ideas are being discussed and they're not kept out of those spaces obviously their ideas are going to become known. Voltaire had a great line on this he referred to his lover Madame Châtelet who was one of the great women scientists of the time as the smartest man he knew. No she is. Meaning. Meaning that you know meaning that she was the equal of any of the men that he could that he could ever talk to but that he could only kind of express this by that turnaround. I just think that's it's so interesting that he chose to put it that way. Yeah and it tells you a lot about the zeitgeist that you know even though there was this sort of acceptance it was still seen as as sort of exceptional or I hate it wasn't it wasn't quite the norm. No of course not of course not women could not get official degrees from Cambridge or Oxford until well into the 20th century. I mean we sometimes forget how recent some of these changes are. Oh yeah here in the United States women couldn't get a bank loan without a co-signature from a man. I mean yeah it's amazing and so these two important components among others this idea of sort of looking around at other cultures and understanding that that Judeo-Christian perspective which was so central is maybe not as ubiquitous as they thought and this idea of the empowerment of women both sort of fed into this grappling with with shall we call it individualism. I hate that we often historically simplify things and we'd go oh in the west were individualist societies and in the east they're collectivist societies but that idea of the self and the other was coming into play against the background of these important I guess intellectual questions. Was France an individualist society long before this? Well I mean there's there's always been elements of individualism probably in every society and those are the people who wrote poems or music or or plays or or eventually novels or or whatever there's always but it's that the realm of individual choice was very limited socially that to to you know a few people let's say in in the upper classes the big difference is the idea that everybody should have the possibility of some form of autonomy that is really quite slow to take to take root and and one one could argue it isn't really true in even western societies completely true until oh the late 19th or 19th or 20th century but there is in the 18th century what's what always fascinated me that there is that there is in the 18th century anxiety about this or or kind of obsession with autonomy which you can certainly see in the novels of the 18th century especially novels that feature women whose autonomy is being restricted with tragic consequences women want to make choices their families don't allow them to make choices and bad things happen and it's so fascinating to me that women are the perfect exemplars of the problems of autonomy because they have less of it yeah yeah that makes perfect sense I mean and you even think about modern American not just our society but our governing principles which are deeply you know founded on these French revolutionary principles that this or at least the philosophy that was born out of this later but these ideas that on paper right there is a rhetoric and there is an idealism about into you know rugged individualism and about every single person having you know equal opportunity and each each person for themselves but then in practice we know that these sort of all agarical values are always grasping they're always trying to hold on to power because as you mentioned people in power don't want to lose their power it's kind of it's baked in but at least from a I don't know an idealistic perspective that that is the foundation of our our own society and it was sort of born in this era wasn't it right right and of course I also very much so in the American revolution where where again you have an emphasis on autonomy autonomy from England in the first place but also autonomy of individuals but we as we know with important limitations for women and the enslaved people and not to mention not to mention the Native Americans you know you have an era of big talk about autonomy and rights and also serious limitations at the same time but I'm the kind of person who's always been more interested in the fact that there's a breakthrough of new ideas rather than the fact that they don't entirely succeed which is so obvious that they're not going that they're not going to be completely successful what's more interesting is that anybody can think something new yeah yeah it is interesting and I find what's really interesting too is that almost any revolutionary idea when taken to the extreme it's sort of like that political argument that it's circular when you take anything to an extreme it sort of bends back on itself into a more pernicious perspective and I guess follow me with this and tell me if you think I'm off base but I'm going to use a parallel from my own work so working as a clinical psychologist in a cancer center one of the very American ideals that we see very often is this idea of free will of the individual of the power you see it a lot this like the secret power of positive thinking just keep a good perspective and you'll get through this and fight that cancer and you know it's all about your perspective and maintaining a positive perspective and what ends up happening to the individuals is that they have undue pressure to stay positive even when authentically they are angry or they are sad and then when inevitably in certain cases the cancer spreads or the individual starts to face end of life decision making there's this deep guilt and blame and shame I didn't do enough I wasn't strong enough I didn't stay positive enough and I see that as a parallel with this sort of rugged individualism that we we grasp so tightly here in the United States it's like manifest destiny pull yourself up by your bootstraps mentality there's so much good in it but when taken to the extreme it actually is very detrimental to the individual because now all of a sudden the only person responsible for your failures is you and we can't blame the system at all no I think that's absolutely true and that in other words is that that's the kind of absurd consequence that you get at the end of the development of an idea of of individual autonomy that somehow this is why again I was so interested in the original coming together of individual autonomy social conditioning what's the where where you're going to put the burden on that yeah yeah and and one one of the things you could say about our current political situation is that the individual autonomy side is winning out over those who think that social conditioning it actually is what deeply shapes things but I think you know this is a pendulum that that that goes back and forth because as you say this this has led to enormous problems in contemporary American society in which people are then sort of blamed for dying even though everyone is going to do that and somehow you you just didn't have the will to not have this to not have this happen so you and that's obviously an absurd consequence of the idea that we control our decities because we don't we don't control our destinies right it's not just biologically but socially we don't control our destinies but right now you know we've the pendulum has swung supposedly in in in a different direction where everything is going to just depend on individual initiative this will it will swing back when the consequences of that become clear I feel I feel certain and I wonder if you know predictively or post-dictively if if when we look at periods of relative calm relative prosperity not unchecked prosperity not you know dangerous like inflation and bubbling but just relative calm sort of between wartime when when people are generally relaxed if if those aren't the errors of balance of a of where the pendulum is kind of netting out at least somewhere in the middle you know that there is a balance between the individualist and the socialist perspective the you know the capitalist and the socialist perspective individualist and collectivist I should say because it does seem to be when the pendulum swing to the extremes that's when there's a lot of I guess a peevil well yeah this would be probably a longer conversation on the sort of arc of American history but you know one of the great errors supposedly of calm was the 1950s but when I think back on my mother who was in her 30s in the 1950s she was she was forced to conform to wrote that you know part of the prosperity was women had to give up their jobs given back to the returning service men and they should stay home and take care of their children and my mother was an incredibly talented person who later in life was able to become a politician because she had an enormous amount of individual willpower but I when I think back of what her life was like when I was a child you know the calm was bought it seems to me at the price of unbelievable amounts of repression of women's possibilities yeah that's true it's a complicated question because calm is often in bought at somebody's expense yeah there are definitely periods of authoritarian calm as well right you know there are definitely periods where it who are we asking you know what is the perspective of calm that's true right and that's that's I guess that's an interesting question to maybe close out with unless there are other concepts that we haven't grappled with that you'd like but this idea of studying history is so fraught because you know the history is written by the people who had the power to write it and you know maybe when we're talking about 1770 to 1800 there were more people who weren't in power who still had access to the tools to to make records and you can still read you know the letters of individuals who were you know everyday people but as you go back further into history we piece together our stories based on very biased perspectives right right no but this has actually been one of the great in some ways I would say that one of the great triumphs of history as a way of study in the in the late 19th and 20th centuries when it really sort of took off as a university subject and that is has been the this the the figuring out of ways to get at the voices of people who didn't write and who perhaps didn't read and write themselves and certainly didn't write anything about themselves and since didn't have many ways of expressing themselves historians have figured out ways of reading police records and a plantation account books and to and and to study the size of the rooms that people lived in and though their inventories of what they left however small upon their death to get at those people without voices and to give them some kind of substance in our minds and and that's been one of the great triumphs for example of the study of slavery because there were virtually no enslaved people who could write about their experiences those those are wonderful documents when we have them and we don't have them before the end of the 18th century for the most part but we have all kinds of other ways of getting at what life was like for those people and that's been it's been an incredible triumph to figure out those other ways I mean hold going back into the middle ages to now you know people can you they use aerial photography to get at you know what's beneath the soil that shows you the size of where people lived so there's been an enormous interest in sort of what we can find out from the little tiny remains of material culture in the past that enable us to really recapture what went on I recently read a fitting story example a great article about what enslaved women war and where they got it where they got that turns out they were in the Caribbean they were wearing Muslim they were actually getting they were saving up what little funds they had to buy imported Muslim from from India to make their their Sunday clothes for example and the people but able to find this out and it's just really that actually enters into my book because there's the question of why women started wearing white Muslim dresses cut in a greetian style in the 1790s and so that led me to read articles about where it came from oh that's fascinating it's and it it's so important that those perspectives be really dug out and extricated in an intentional way instead of the sort of passive like well let's just skim off the top what's you know obvious because then of course history is going to continue to have that same biased perspective that it has had for so much of its academic past the voices of the oppressed of the marginalized tell history from not only a different perspective but a very raw perspective that is absolutely necessary and so I don't know I'm so I'm so grateful for the insights that you've shared with us today I'm curious if there's anything we didn't get to any sort of top line theses that we didn't really grapple with or if you if you feel confident that that was a good untray like a wedding of the appetite of what you share in the book right well I hope so I mean I there there are so many there the great thing about history is that in the terrible thing about history is that it could be infinite I mean there is so much you know when you're writing something I'm sure you have the same experience in psychology as well it what's hard is finding finding out how to stop because you could you could go forever could there's yet another in your cases maybe yet another interview you could do or yet some other book that you could read and in my case yet some other thing that you could look into and so you know things all everything has to come to an end including including podcasts yeah it's so true and you're right we could always always I find myself saying that almost every guess like oh I could do another how are with you maybe one day we'll get back to the cat there's the maybe when you're right your next book we'll have you back and we'll talk even more but in the meantime I just want thank you so much for being here for sharing these insights with us and for doing the important work that you do thank you again for having me it's been it's been so much fun to to talk about these issues and and heartening to know that there are many conversations yet to be had absolutely everybody the book is the revolutionary self social change and the emergence of the modern individual 1770 to 1800 by Dr. Lynn Hunt and everybody listening thank you for coming back week after week I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk
