 Here in America, work is in trouble. We've off-short our manufacturing, sent away good jobs, and lost so much ability to make things. American Giant is a company that's pushing back against this tide. They make high-quality clothing. Sweat shirts, jeans, dresses, jackets, and so much more right here in the USA. Visit American-Giant.com and get 20% off your first order when you use CodeStaple20 at checkout. That's 20% off your first order at American-Giant.com, promo code staple20. Hello everyone and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, February 10th, 2025, and I'm the host of the show, Dr. Cara Santa Maria. And as I do every week, I want to thank those of you right at the top of the show who make Talk Nerdy possible. If you are interested in supporting the show on an episodic basis, I recommend you go to patreon.com slash Talk Nerdy. Do it in your browser, not in the app. All right, this week's top patrons include Anubata Vaj, Daniel Lang, David J. Smith, Mary Niva, Brian Holden, David Compton, Gabrielle F. Haramio, Joe Wilkinson, Joseph Lamore, Pascuali Jalati, and oh, no, Rico Maharaj, and I'm going to talk about the show. I'm going to talk about the show, and I'm going to talk about the show, and I'm going to talk about the show, and oh, no, Rico Maharaj, and Ulrika Hagman. Thank you all so, so much. All right, let's get into it without any time to waste. I had the wonderful opportunity to speak today with Dr. Reena Bliss. She is the author of the previous books, Rethinking Intelligence, Race Decoded, and Social by Nature. She's an associate professor of sociology at Rutgers University, and she has a new book out. It's called What's Real About Race, Untangling Science, Genetics, and Society. So without any further ado, here she is, Dr. Reena Bliss. Well, Reena, thank you so much for joining me today. Thank you for having me. I am really excited to talk about your new book, What's Real About Race, Untangling Science, Genetics, and Society. And of course, you are a sociology professor. Is your whole academic background in sociology, or did you study a lot of different things along the way? I've actually studied a lot of different things along the way. I do have a PhD in sociology, but I have another graduate degree in ethnic studies. I have also two BAs. One was in sociology, one is in women and gender studies. So I've really studied a lot. And actually, during my PhD, I studied genetics, human genetics, and genomics, and in preparation for all of the research that was to come. I studied a lot and became a genetics expert myself. And my work in general is really about things like health and illness, genes and environments, and all the new information that we can harness from understanding our genomes. I've done a lot of different things, worn a lot of different hats, and continued to wear a lot of different hats. When you were defending before you got your PhD, was this the area that you focused your dissertation on? Yes, it was. And I actually turned that dissertation into my first book, which was on the relationship between race and genetics. But written in a more academic way, of course, your first books tend to be if you go into academia. So that book was called Restecoded. And it really was focused on the human genome project and the series of genome projects that unfolded in the following 10, 15 years after that project ended. And it was just such an exciting time because it was really the beginning of genomics going from bench to bedside and going from laboratory science to public health. And it was a phenomenal thing to be studying at that time and to be writing about. It's interesting because the subject matter obviously is phenomenal, like you say, and just fascinating and very quickly moving. But also, I think you and I share a difficulty in that our fields, my field of psychology, your field of sociology, they're historically fraught, like deeply, deeply intertwined with some of the same issues around race and gender, some of the same rhetoric, some of the same white supremacist motives that your research actually touches on. So it's baked into the sort of history of the academic movement that you find yourself in. And I'm curious what that has been like for you. Sort of, I don't know, excavating these things and learning things in class that were like, that's questionable, we need to bring this out into the light. Yeah, well, I mean, it kind of goes back to where I got an interest in genetics and race, which is from my own personal story. My parents come from two different continents and I'm from here from the US where we're recording this. But also, I come from a really vibrant immigrant community in Los Angeles. And my mom is an immigrant from Indonesia who came to this country to seek an education, a better life. And while she was living in LA, she met my dad who came from New York, but his family that he traveled with to Los Angeles was Ashkenazi, Jewish. And so we were all mixed up. And when I was a kid, and this is when the human genome project, and really the field of genomics just was getting started at all, I was pretty confused about race, even though I had access to kind of these very rich experiences culturally and just community-wise, I was confused by what it meant to be mixed or what it meant to be more than one thing. And also, there wasn't a lot coming out from the genome project yet because that had to get underway. I think that at the time, really the talk about race and what it meant for individuals like you and me, that was coming from sociology and from psychology. But more in terms of trying to explain social and psychological processes of identity and of where we were in terms of social conditions and policies and things like that, right? But not in terms of what that had to do with our biology. So that's why I was really confused when I was young and why I kind of seized on this interest that I had going forward with all of this, what now we've got genomes and we've got knowledge about what is going on in terms of humanity on the grand scale. And so I started out with just this confusion and then this fascination that just grew and grew as I came through middle school, high school, college. Our fields have been implicated. Back when I was a kid, it was not like there was a lot of vitriolic, difficult, awful things coming out of sociology or genetics or pretty much science and medicine was everyone was trying to help create some kind of equality in our quickly desegregating kind of society, right? Not so long before that, before I was alive, but not so long in terms of human history, we all of all of the fields. We were all kind of embroiled in eugenics and this idea that there was one race that was the superior race and that all of the other races were biologically inferior and that was something in your genes that you could find if you just found genetic variants that were different between members of different races that meant that the ones who were not white were inferior for those reasons and the white people who had the other variant were superior for those reasons. And the first big book in this field was the person who really introduced the idea of eugenics in the first place whose France has gotten it, he gave a lecture on his book to the American Sociological Society or was it the British Sociological Society? I'm going to have to go back and take a look which one it was. I think it was American Sociological Society or association, right? It was actually, now I remember. So it's just amazing to think that that was his target audience at the time, you know, in this way back late 19th century but it's like that was his target audience because that's where every field, psychology, sociology, anything you could think of was really just deeply invested in white supremacy. Absolutely. Yeah, it was a view. And at the time, it was, it's interesting when you watch, I think, like films, like there's a really good PBS documentary about the eugenics movement and this presentation that was so sanitized and so steeped in sort of academic language and rhetoric that to the outside or to somebody who, or actually while you were deeply in it probably, it almost didn't feel pernicious. It felt like, oh, this is about hygiene. This is about making better babies. This is about, and it had this kind of sheen to it that was so dark and so horrific, but I don't think people recognized it at the time. Yeah, I think that's partly why, why that kind of what I call in the book, Modern Race, you know, this kind of paradigm, this phenomenon that was introduced with eugenics, why it found its way into the fabric of the following paradigm of race, which I kind of envision is coalescing around the United Nations statement on race. That was made in the 50s and that was after, you know, the horrors of Nazi race science and, you know, the Holocaust were exposed and people were like, all, you know, in all of these fields that we were just talking about, where this is like, we have to get away from this horrible idea of racial hierarchy. And, you know, the statement on race that the UN UNESCO, its cultural and scientific branch, you know, put together, really tapped the world's top scientists to say, we're all equal and we have to be treated as such under the law. That in those statements, it's fascinating if you look into the wording, it's like, they still had this idea that, biologically, there were races. They might not be one better than the other, but, you know, they did exist and they were different. And so, because there wasn't such, you know, a rapport about the biological messaging that we got from that earlier time period, we kind of migrated the idea into the early genomic kind of era. And, and it hasn't really been washed out from any of the current science that we have been, you know, trying to create on a better standing, right? Yeah, and it's interesting how this, this kind of, like you mentioned, this genomic data, these, these large kind of population studies, these statistical analyses, when academics, and these are interesting questions that they're asking, right? Like, there's a lot of really interesting genetic inquiry, but that somehow, you say the word DNA enough, and it justifies claims that really the research don't make, you know, but very often, there is a legitimization, I guess, to social distinction or to these categories, like these concepts that, you know, we talk about race, race is a construct, and I think we'll get to, in a minute, to like, what that actually means, but it's funny that if, if there's enough sort of like, sciencey words thrown in, that it's much easier for people to just swallow, like, yeah, yeah, that's, that seems legitimate. Yeah, I mean, what's the most legitimate way to prove what you are, a DNA test, right? That's, that's how people, that's kind of like the go-to way of proving where you come from or what you truly are, and that's even true in terms of people trying to grasp on to a specific racial identity, or ethnic, or, you know, genetic ancestry, but really like, you know, this is something that's been supercharged in terms of racial identities. Yeah, I mean, it's no different in some ways. It's the modern equivalent of like, one-drop rules, and these different kind of, I don't know, this conceptualization of a person via some sort of genetic constituent part. Obviously, what you do with that, it historically is very, very fraught, but this idea that, oh, if I can get into the genome, and I can make kind of bold claims about, you were in the third wave of, you know, your maternal ancestry says, you were in the third wave out of West Africa, and then you went to this region first, and then you intermixed with these people over here, and that somehow, that says something about your essence or your nature, which is fascinating to me, and that's why I want to maybe jump into this concept of race and race as a construct, because we've been throwing the word race around a lot. I want to give an interesting example of a dear friend of mine, very dear friend, who is also Ashkenazi, who is, you know, I'll put some of the political conversations that we've been having recently on the side, because I don't think they're as relevant to this conversation, but it was in the context of some, obviously, some recent, quite charged political conversations, and he made a really interesting statement to me. He was like, oh, but I'm not white, I'm Jewish. And I was like, what? And it was a really fascinating, I think, like there's a lot of depth to that statement that has to do with this very concept of race as a construct, race as a social construct, what we know about it, how we identify with it, what our in-group is, what our out-group is, because while it's true that to the entire world, this man whose ancestry, I guess you could say, would be from Eastern Europe, at least recently, who to the entire world presents as white, right? Walk into a grocery store, has all the privileges of a white man, walk into a job interview, has all the privileges of a white man, that there have been historical experiences that shaped him feeling like the other, because white supremacists don't see him as white. Right, right. So that's a fascinating concept. Yeah, it's amazing. I mean, that actually gets to some very important things about kind of how we talk about race, and the lay kind of conversation around race, which usually assumes that, you know, kind of in, especially in the US, like there's a pitting of white versus black, or white versus all others not whites, right? And then there's also kind of a recognition that there are some ethnic, and, you know, even not as narrowly limited as the word ethnicity implies, but like, you know, kind of major classes of groups, such as Jewish or Arab, right, that are supposed to be contentencerally, or somehow, you know, racially white, but also are not quite treated as white or not treated as equals, you know, to people who are from Northwestern Europe say. And so it's just like basically in the earliest kind of times of people trying to formulate science and move from kind of, you know, the more magical or religion-based divisions of the world into a more scientific kind of biological notion back in, like, let's say, the 1800s, you know, the Enlightenment era, there was this drilling down to the idea of continental difference and that, like, each continent had its own, you know, they didn't know about genes back then, but, you know, it kind of had the sense of, like, what some of the early naturalist used to call, like, seeds in our blood, you know, or, like, blood lines, right? And so the idea was that there was something called race, races of the human, you know, family races of the human race, that, you know, each of them had their own unique lineages of heredity that would be passed on and on, but that were somehow determined by which continent you were looking at, right? Right. So that's like where we get the general notion of race as being continental. Moving forward, you know, we've seen, again, these groups that have been treated, like, others to that white Nordic, or, you know, kind of, north-western European supremacist concept, right? And so it's a lot more complicated than that continental model would have it. And yet we still have this notion of continental differences. And when you look at the way that, you know, these ancestry tests, the genetic tests are presented, you get a lot of, like, you know, visualization through maps that show these different continents, and you could drag your, you know, your kind of cursor over the different parts of the globe, and you're seeing it in terms of this very continental sense of differences, right? So that's true. So it deeply, deeply how it's presented. Yeah. Yeah, it's very, it's very, you know, and also, you know, today, most genetic test makers, they don't tell you, like, oh, your white versus, you know, black versus Asian versus Native American, et cetera, et cetera, right? They don't tell you that they used to, actually, I'm taking a test, they're being given a test that, you know, was, like, just telling you portions based on these continental divisions, you know. Oh, you won't want 30 second black. Yeah, that's your thing. Yeah. You know, 48% Asian or 48%, you know, black or whatnot, you know. But, yeah, today, you know, they're, they're the results that you get from your own ancestry tests are reported in a lot more fine tooth fine resolution kind of scale. But at the same time, the way that the results are depicted through the mapping, you know, and through that kind of sense of, of continental differences in, in the scheme of things, it reinforces this idea that there are continental distinct races, and that somehow the old populations that we all hail from come from these various continents, right? Yeah, and I kind of feel like it's even more, I don't want to say fraught, but like, upsetting than that, because I think what a lot of people don't realize about these sort of genetic ancestry tests, like 23 and me or ancestry.com is that when they say you, like your DNA is whatever percent this or like you hail from like your ancestry is from here, they're actually comparing your genetic. So, you know, you're more genetic differences, your your variance to modern populations living in those areas, and so like they're saying, oh, you, you have the genes that are similar to, you know, this many people in this region, but they're, I feel like they're often not taking into account all the different migratory patterns over all of human history. Absolutely true, they're not because they, and they don't even have the, you know, DNA from people from every single place that exists on the planet. Of course, they have DNA that they have access to from different collections and some, you know, some of them are their own sampling, you know, campaigns, you know, they're like, they're looking out. Yeah, they've gone out and collected DNA, but, you know, much of it is from large skill collections that other others have collected and, you know, they, those collections rely on geneticists having relationships with populations on the ground in different countries and different places. And they don't have relationships with everybody, you know, so their reference populations are limited to what they have, which are samples of convenience, they're not samples from every single group of every single, you know, country and every single part of the world. And so, you know, my mom was saying to me the other day that she really wanted to get an ancestry test, a genetic ancestry test because her mother was adopted. And so she was like, I've always wanted to find out, you know, what, where she really comes from. And I was like, you know, they probably don't have enough in their database in terms of reference DNA from the places that she comes from that we know that she lived. So she's from yesterday. Yeah, she's from Kalimantan and from a specific kind of part of Kalimantan that I just would be surprised if anybody has that, you know, in their in their sample pool. So it's like, how are we going to know, you know, they'll just say like, oh, you know, you probably share DNA with these people who live in this particular city and this particular part of Indonesia. That's not going to tell us where her ancestors actually come from. And then as you're pointing out, where do we come from? I mean, we've been migrating for all of humanity. You know, it's like, we don't really just come from one place. We come from a lot of places. Absolutely. And we've gone and come back to places. We've venture, you know, it's like there's some information about maternal haplotype where you can kind of see certain waves of like migration out of certain kind of seats of humanity. But beyond that, I do feel like it's really fraught the bold claims that are made, especially to your point that you were making about how we have a lot of data basically from white people, like a lot of white people have taken DNA tests. And that's why when you look at a white person, like my ancestry, when you look at it, it's like, ooh, you are this percent Irish versus this percent English versus this percent Scottish. And I'm like, oh my God, like these groups. Yes, you can go back and find some distinction, but they're all kind of the same. But then they'll be like, you are broadly West African. And you're like, wait a minute. Exactly. There's so much variance there, but they just they don't have the fine resolution. And so then people, but the sad thing is it reinforces these concepts that like Africa, this massive continent with, you know, all of these different countries and thousands of languages and different cultures and different subpopulations of people is all just kind of African, right? But ooh, the northern Irish and the, you know, whatever, let's say Western Scottish. Let's talk about the distinctions between them. It's it's infuriating. Yeah, yeah, exactly. Another thing that I write about in the book is how we see things like skin color and hair texture and nose shape and eye shape. And you know, it's like whether you have certain kind of eyelids or other kinds of eyelids, you know, as being cues for what race a person is like which one of those continent somebody comes, you know, from. And this is all this is what, you know, when we're saying what's a social construct, what does that mean exactly? It's it's these are the lies that we've told ourselves for centuries. And, you know, unfortunately, we'll probably tell ourselves for many more centuries if we don't kind of start to talk about this more and understand that, you know, what somebody looks like may be different from what another person looks like, but it doesn't mean that you know where they're from or what, you know, what their ancestors did or what they where they were or any of this stuff, you know, or what they're doing. Or what their value is, that's the most important part of it, you know, we do a whole other layer. Yeah, we assign this kind of value to what if you have this color hair or if you have this texture of hair or you know, it's like there is no value and there's no meaning to differences in our bodies. We create those and that's what that, you know, construction is it's like we create that meaning. And in the past, we've had, you know, governments and, you know, ruling bodies that have wanted to have a very clear hierarchy so that they could justify things like enslavements, colonization, extermination, right. All of those things that like the see what this person's nose looks like, see what that person's I, I shape looks like right this tells us what they're like inside how they'll behave, what kind of actions they're about to take. Don't trust those people right. We can we can do what we want with them because they're the bad people. And so that's why we had this whole lexicon of what the variations meant, but what I'm trying to do with this book and what I hope people will understand from reading it is that we don't need to invest in those broken notions of human variation. We don't need to see human differences as meaning anything more than different. Right. And even when you do look at those claims that are made, I think one of the things that we often, I don't know, I had a professor pretty early in my academic training that taught a concept that has always really stuck with me. And I think it honestly did shape a lot of how my lens of how I read these types of papers and how I think about these concepts was like, okay, number one phenotype like what we see is only like a small percentage of what our DNA actually tells us like what we can physically see skin color hair texture like all the things that you said is the tiniest tiniest fraction of what our DNA is coding for. But number two that there is more this was that this was the statement that was made that I just it's so like change the way I think about things that there's more within group variation than between group variation almost every way you slice it when you think about race or ethnicity. Exactly. And that's why we don't need to do the grouping, you know, we don't need to have groups because it's inaccurate. You know, it's like there are differences and the differences we should be focusing on are medically relevant differences when there's something medically relevant like something life or death. And yes, let's focus on that, but I promise you that you will not find a medically relevant distinction that tracks with race. You will never find one that tracks with continental variation and you probably won't find one that tracks with ethnic variation either unless we're talking like very, very, very like minor minor minor sub minor ethnicity. And you know, even when we say like Jewish, you know, not all Jews have genes that predispose you to aggressive forms of breast cancer or ovarian cancer, right. So it's like the idea and then, you know, even just sit using the term Jewish, we know that there are people who identify as Ashkenazi Jewish people who identify as Sephardic Jewish people who identify as all kinds, you know, there are people like, you know, in different parts of central and western and eastern Africa that identify as Jewish with a different, you know, completely different set of, you know, phenotype and, you know, disease concerns and right. So it's like there's no, there's no just like drawing a distinct line around any group that we can think of and saying like, okay, these people have this disease, nobody else has that disease, nobody else's, you know, needs to worry about that. Really like all across the whole planet, we have people sharing the same kinds of concerns, medical concerns and also sharing, you know, similar genetic predispositions and we need to work on fixing our healthcare system so that people can prevent getting diseases and that's true for no matter where you are. It's an interesting idea, this, this because race is a construct and because it's like I can say unwaveringly that it's not real, right, it's constructed, but then I can turn around as again a psychologist who actually works in a hospital and say, but it's so very real because yes, it's constructed, but it also has deep ramifications for how people are treated. And one thing we can say beyond a shadow of a doubt is that black people get worse healthcare, right, like they're treated differently in a hospital and their outcomes are worse, they're diagnosed with cancer later after they're more likely to have advanced metastatic disease when it's first caught. So like that's the interesting thing that it yes, it has these outcomes and ramifications, but not for the reason that a lot of people think it's not essentialist, it's because of systemic racism, it's because of behaviors. Exactly, and that's something that I write about to you is just, you know, that there is a reality to race, that reality is in our way of treating each other in our way of regarding each other in our way of assessing each other and assuming information, assuming qualities of the person that we're facing, right. So there's a reality that has spun out from all of the lies. One thing is the biology of race is a fiction, but the other thing is the social reality of race continues to proliferate because people believe that fake information, the fake truth of the biology of race. And we haven't been able to eradicate that even from textbooks, you know, so it's probably going to be a long time before we get to the point where we can just say, okay, we've kicked that notion aside and we're moving forward. Without this investment in a biological notion of race, if we can get there, that would be really great because then we can make better choices about how we treat each other. We can actually see that the variation. That we are presented with is meaningless as only as meaningful as we want to make it. Now, you know, I don't think that we're ever going to get to the point where we have no sense of race because we've already built communities around it. We've politicized around feeling and, you know, being treated differently and also around all of the devastation of all of our relationships and communities that has happened over, you know, over centuries, over centuries through enslavement through, you know, incarceration in this country. We're not just a part of, you know, of black male youth, especially, but, you know, of people of color in general. And, you know, the kind of mistreatment and systemic racism that you are just alluding to. We have way too much of that and we have too much of a need to coalesce as communities of color and to present an alternative for us to kind of work our way out of any notion of race. At this point, there is a part of the social reality of race that is nourishing and community building and that part of it will, I think, will live on. If you work in quality control at a candy factory, you know strict safety regulations come with the job. It's why you partner with Granger. Granger helps you find the high quality and compliant products your business needs to inspect, detect and help correct issues. And the sweetest part is, everyone gets a product that's as safe to eat as it is delicious. Call 1-800-GRanger, click ranger.com or just stop by. Granger, for the ones who get it done. And also, I think, protective, right? Like when we talk about things like diversity, equity and inclusion studies, when we talk about racial and ethnic studies, the, I guess, sort of the pernicious underbelly of this idea of some sort of like utopian, you know, future where race as a construct has, has, I don't know, disappeared. It's easy for that to be co-opted by certain political ideologies and say like, oh, but yeah, like I'm color blind, right? And like I don't see race. And so I think that actually affirmative action is racist. And if we should just do away with all of this because everybody, that just is, it's misguided. And it's honestly, it's intentionally misguided as we know, right? It's actually in service to white supremacist ideals. But it's very easy, I think, to get confused when we talk about these concepts. And we hear some of the same, the very things that you've been saying from an academic, very deeply research perspective. It's very easy for somebody, I think, with these misguided views to see, wait, she just said, see, like, it's racist to have DEI programs. Right? And, you know, so that's, that's why I would say there is no black gene, but there is anti-black genetics. And we are still in a time where, unfortunately, we have so much work to do in terms of figuring out how to reach populations that have been previously excluded from research. All of those populations of color that you mentioned, and, you know, and bring people into the fold of research and at the same time, not discriminate against them and not recreate essentialist kind of theories based off of our research, you know. And so right now, what we need to do is work on really bringing to light all of the anti-black and anti-bipoc people of color, you know, black indigenous people of color, all of that kind of irresponsible use of science and anything that's going on today, especially. And we need to talk about it more, not say, like, okay, well, now we're done with it. And, you know, now we can all be colorblind. There's no such thing as, you know, white genes, black genes, Asian genes, et cetera, et cetera. No, we actually need to talk about why we thought that in the first place and how present day research reifies that or reinforces that even as we try to get away from it, right? Yeah. And, you know, I want to ask you a question that I think I want to ask it in a very particular context, right? Because you, you are a sociologist, you with a lot of biological research expertise and knowledge. You are not a political scientist and you definitely are not somebody who has like expertise on these sort of machinations of like executive privilege and things like that. So I don't want to get into the weeds of the, like, kind of current political landscape, but I want to take a step back and ask you as somebody who not only is your research near and dear to your heart, you know, academically, but also personally, how are you coping or what you're doing? coping or what are your anxieties around this kind of very obvious, not just initiative, but an initiative that has now, I think, power thrown behind it to like to do away with DEI, to do away with to really say, okay, what basically what you do as a researcher is not valid and you shouldn't have your role and that there's actual threats now to institutions and people are legitimately losing their jobs because they have dedicated their lives to researching these, you know, historical inequities and, you know, learn how not to repeat history. It's a hard time. I have colleagues, friends, you know, people who I'm close to who have had to close their offices, offices that were, you know, thriving research centers and they have had to close their doors, you know, and just move on to other projects and it's really going to set us back a lot. But I think that, you know, I always try to look for a positive way forward through whatever mess we find ourselves in and there's always some kind of mess that we're in. And I think that one thing that was, you know, that was kind of way that DEI was becoming a buzzword and was becoming stale in a certain way without enough of this like deep research. And we need research into what is true and what is not true, what is real and what is not real, you know, and what can we do and what are we going to do that's building completely new ways of thinking about race and new ways of bringing forth inequality, right. And I'm hoping that when we move past this initial slamming pushback against any inequality research or talking about it at all, I hope that when we get past that point, because I really do believe we will get past that point. I hope that we can revitalize and kind of infuse our interest in inequality and creating equality and health equity in particular with a lot more information that, you know, let's us understand the process of seeing race, something I write about the process of believing in race, something else I write about. And that many others do, of course, you know, that's, you know, that's one of my favorite things about the book is that I just bring so many different research approaches to light with, you know, writing about the psychology as you're, you know, something close to your heart, you know, of, of like seeing race and experiencing race and also, you know, some of my favorite people that I write about in the book are, you know, philosophers of race. And, you know, just the, this process of how we experience it and why it matters to us, why it, you know, our minds, even neuroscientifically, like why we seize on this idea. So, so intensely, right? So I hope that there is a way to move past the initial vitriol and also just kind of, I feel like we're in this moment of just like, no, stop, like don't do it, don't ask questions, you know, and move on the other side of that to let's figure this out. Let's find a new way and create a new paradigm, essentially, of race, something that is going to be uplifting for people who are subjugated by this idea of race and also, yeah, just create a new, a new sense of community around the knowledge of what's real. Yeah, there's something very sort of, I think, existential about that view, very kind of logo therapy, man search for meaning, Victor, frankly, about this view that like, that like these pressures, I guess we could call them social political pressures that we're experiencing right now, which are very sort of, you know, anti-DI, but in many ways, deeply motivated by, by racism, that they are sort of, a social pressure, the way that we think almost about like evolution, right, like that there are these like pressures that are put on on us and that we will get through this and in getting through this, it's actually, I guess the good takeaway against this absolute shit storm is that it's causing us to stop being lazy or to stop, like kind of just going with the flow academically and to really take a step back again and say, hey, where are we making this? The same mistakes that we've been fighting against, where are we getting like resting on our laurels, where are we just kind of like repeating the rhetoric and how can we drill down and actually continue to be, I don't know, continue to try to come up with policy, try to engage in conversations that are an attempt to write historical wrongs or at the very least, make sure that people have access to knowledge about historical wrongs so that we're not doomed to keep repeating it over and over. Definitely, I mean, one of the things that I end the book on is, you know, what kind of research is good research and that invokes racial categories, that invokes race. And I, you know, I start by addressing the community of geneticists and, you know, kind of genomics adjacent fields that I have worked with through my career. And I talk about how, and biologists, and I talk about systems biology and just these different models that an epigenetics and I'm, you know, I'm not going to get too jargony or like, you know, get too into, as you mentioned before, the weeds. But like, I just, you know, I start by saying like, this, we need to reevaluate when we use racial categories. If we're doing a study that is trying to measure racism, discrimination, we need to use those categories. If we're not, we probably shouldn't be using those categories. Actually, we should not be using them. And so that's something that I would say to any of my colleagues in sociology or more broadly in the social sciences or in the humanities, right? All of the fields, all the fields that are out there, every single form of science and humanities research, any research, it needs to figure out why we are using racial categories. So I think that that has been a problem even in my own, you know, home field of sociology, just seeing how many people just throw race into their study as if it's just some kind of variable that just belongs there by, you know, without even thinking why, why am I using this? So hopefully this kind of horrible shock to our collective system will help us to answer, you know, answer those questions or ask the question in the first place, like what purpose are these categories serving in my research? And then that's also, you know, something that I'd like to broaden out to people in general, you know, the place I really end the book isn't talking about how I talked to my kids about race. And I really do, even I have been talking to them since they were, you know, two years old, since they barely had words, you know, but I talk about it with them because we, I want them to understand and they do understand actually that the way we think with race has an impact on our world, right? So it's kind of like researchers need to question why they're thinking with race, why they're using racial categories and not just need to use them. And my kids and me and you and everybody, you know, needs to also ask ourselves, like why am I thinking with this right now? How is this serving me or the people I'm with or the person I'm supposed to be interacting with and bonding with and communing with, right? Like is this good for me to be thinking this in this way right now? Once we get aware of how we're thinking with race, we can dismantle the kind of programming and then replace it with conscious intentional kind of thought. If we do that, then I really believe that we will create a world where the reality of race is beneficial and not harmful to people. Yeah, it's it's funny because two things come up for me before we start to wrap up because I do feel like I do this sometimes that was such a beautiful way to just like end the episode, but I'm like, one is and we won't like get to into the weeds about it, but in some ways, but not always. You could sort of say the exact same thing about gender, right? Like that's like that's a whole other can of forms with other variables, but very similarly, right? Like we could say the exact same thing that like there are times when these constructs or even these, I don't want to call them essentialists because they're not, but these biological differences do serve a purpose, do have, and like when we talk about, let's say gender, for example, or even biological sex, that there's there's a reason for it that it's meaningful and that it's important to understand that and then there are other times when it's used as a tool for oppression and it's used as a tool for, you know, supremacy. And it's important to be aware of those things and I guess I think about my own dissertation. And one of the things I grappled with when I was writing it because I did a qualitative, I won't get into the weeds on it, but I did a qualitative study on the experience of choosing to die with medical aid. And I interviewed four participants who all were interested in and ultimately did hasten their death from various diseases. You know, they were terminally ill and they hastened their death using medical aid and dying and they were all white. And I remember having lots of conversations with committee members and lots of conversation about, you know, and just like you said, you list your demographics every researcher does, why are we listing these? What is the purpose? And I really grappled with that with my research and I did go into the idea of like, all of my participants are white because white people buy and large use medical aid and dying. Like, like, there's a reason that in my dissertation wasn't about racial usage of this tool, right? So I wasn't, I wanted to just know why anybody would use it and who did I have access to the people using it and who mostly uses it, white people, why? Because of systemic racism. Right, right, because they have access medically. And so it became this interesting concept where I did grapple with these ideas, but there was almost a pressure within academics to be like, well, but you need balance or you need to find, and it's like, wait, but you're ignoring the reality of the actual population. This is a sample of the population because of all of these problems. Yeah, that's such a great example, you know, it's like if you wrote up the dissertation and were able to put an explanation like what you just said, you know, explaining why there's disparity in the usage and access to an access issue, right? That's what you're really talking about is, you know, who can access this particular kind of treatment or this particular kind of, you know, technology even. But it's something that you have to explain. Otherwise, a person can just come away from the report and just think, you know, oh, well, it's because white people like this, you know, right? And so, and like, you know, they have a certain relationship to their bodies or to death that's different and, or, you know, even, and even if it were true that there are different cultural differences between the three groups. Yeah, you would explain that otherwise, it would just be kind of hanging there as, you know, these, they're just, they're just different. And that's what I see with today's genomic research, the by and large, the community of genomic researchers do not want to have any kind of racial anything in their, you know, in the span of their research. But, but because our public health institutions have us collect data by race and don't require that we explain why we're using those categories. And even an explanation as simple as my grant asked me to do this or, you know, this was part of my, you know, making sure I had inclusion of different populations per my grants instructions, you know. But because we don't actually explain what happens is then the media gets a hold of some kind of report that a study that was only done on white people and then says like, well, white people have this problem. And then that leads other people, including, you know, readers of scientific reports or listeners of the news, right? You know, you know, people who are consuming podcasts or consuming whatnot, right? And to say, oh, will whites do this, blacks do this, whites have this, blacks have that, right? And so it really does come down to that really careful questioning of why we're using these variables, why we're thinking with these variables or these categories. And then why we're applying them, why we're sharing data or information about ourselves or other people with, you know, talking about race. If we can get it to the point where we are aware of when we're doing it and why we're doing it and we can be clear and honest about it, then I think we'll be in a better place. Absolutely. And that means I think fostering from every level of culture and society, from the media to our academic institutions, to the family, to everything and be to, you know, religious rhetoric, to everything in between, it means fostering an interest and a passion for context and nuance and gray area. And that's something that historically Americans have struggled with culturally. We are really, really, I don't know, we find comfort in these broad distinctions. And I mean, that brings us back full circle, right? We don't want ambiguity or ambivalence, which is why we categorize people in the first place. Yeah, yeah. And it's really, you know, it's fascinating for me being that I was, I started out being confused as a mixed race, you know, child. And then my kids who are now the age I was when I started to really feel aware of my confusion, you know, I was confused since, yes, early as preschool. I started to be kind of like aware that there was something brewing and something displeasing me and something that was, you know, hurtful, you know, in the whole thing around the time of, you know, how old my kids are. And so I, like now I get to see, you know, them being mixed, but different than I, you know, and how they understand race and how they're grappling with, you know, the differences that people impose on them. And on their friends and their community members, right? And so, yeah, it's, it's really interesting. I do, I do think that we have a lot of potential for growth around this and that, you know, that they are pleased when I talk to my kids, I can see that their teachers and caregivers are, are very much trying to create an environment where you can talk about race and where you can talk about difference. And where you can support each other in different experiences. And at the same time, they're also trying to get away from the idea that we have innate differences that make some people superior and inferior. So I'm hopeful, you know, cautiously, hopeful, cautiously optimistic. And it has to be right now, right? Because there, we are now entering into an era where there are more severe ramifications and consequences for engaging in the very way that we've been discussing for this whole hour and that you so beautifully just kind of summarized is necessary to engage. It can threaten your job now. It could threaten your livelihood. But I'm hopeful because I know how much this matters to so many people. And I know how many people will engage in civil disobedience. I know how many people see the sort of draconian efforts right now to silence or to undo a lot of this important work. And they're not standing for it. They're just saying, like, not not here. That's not going to work here. That's right. That's right. And that's that gives me hope. Gosh, this has been such a joy. I feel like there's so much more always to talk about. But of course, we also like it's in the book guys. You got to read the book. So everybody, the book is what's real about race, untangling science, genetics and society by Dr. Reena Bliss. Reena, thank you so much for for being here and for sharing with us. Thank you so much for having me. Absolutely. And everybody listening. Thank you for coming back week after week. I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk very late.