 Welcome to STEM Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hello, I'm your host, Dr. Ken Fort, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all of the guests who appear on STEM Talk. Dawn is playing hooky today, so I will go it alone. Today, I have Dr. Vivian Lowe returning for her second appearance on STEM Talk to discuss atherosclerotic heart disease, which has been reported to affect 26 million people in the United States, leading to 2 million hospitalizations annually and more than, unfortunately, 400,000 deaths. Vivian is a board-certified physician in obesity and internal medicine. In episode 142 of STEM Talk, we talked to Vivian about her Boston-based preventative care practice that specializes in weight management, the treatment of chronic metabolic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. Today, I have a wide-ranging interview with Vivian, largely about arthrosclerosis and also recent research that has shown substantial individual variability in the response to statin therapy as a way to lower cardiovascular risk. I also talked to Vivian about one of her pet peeves, which is about how the current knowledge base informing clinical practice in medicine today is far behind advances in biological science, especially in the field of arthrosclerotic disease. Before I get to my interview with Vivian, I have some housekeeping to take care of. First, all of us here at STEM Talk really appreciate those of you who have subscribed to STEM Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the wittiest and most lavishly praise-filled reviews to read here on STEM Talk. If you hear your review read on STEM Talk, just contact us at STEMTalk at IHMC.us to claim your official STEM Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by a Canadian listener who goes by the moniker Canuck Supporter. It reads, Well, thank you, Canuck Supporter, and thanks to all our other STEM Talk listeners who have helped STEM Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now on to today's interview with Dr. Vivian Lowe. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. Welcome back to STEM Talk, Vivian. As you were our guest on Episode 142, we will forego the usual biographical background material, which in your case is actually especially interesting, and I urge listeners to review Episode 142. Arthroscorotic heart disease has been reported to affect 26 million people, leading to roughly 2 million hospitalizations and over 400,000 deaths a year in the United States. These are really shocking numbers. Despite the widespread use of statins for primary prevention of arthroscorotic heart disease, their effects have been variable when reviewing the occurrence of major adverse cardiac events post-statin therapy. Could you discuss this a little? Yeah, I think, obviously, with statin therapy, then we're focused on cholesterol because, after all, that's what statins target. They target the synthetic pathway for cholesterol, and the idea has been that we need to target people who have what is termed high levels of cholesterol because that is what is causal for atherosclerosis, right? And so I think throughout the world, there's been this focus on addressing that as the main way to prevent atherosclerotic disease. And we've seen that, really, that's not been very effective. And time and time again, I think different people, different groups, medical groups have come up to remind us of that and to say, you know, even with the extensive lowering of cholesterol levels in some patients, we're still really not doing much in terms of primary prevention to eliminate atherosclerosis. So if it's causal, then it really should be taking care of the problem completely, but it's not. And I think, you know, we're so focused on it. It's kind of like fish, you know, it's kind of like fish because it's convenient, right? I mean, there's no such thing as fish, but it's a convenient way to think of the creatures that live in the ocean, right? And so we have in our heads this idea of fish, and it's really not scientifically valid, but we cling to the concept of this even though it doesn't make sense scientifically. Following up on that, I know that one of your pet peeves is that the current knowledge base in forming clinical practice in medicine is far behind advances in the biological sciences more generally. And for example, in the field of arthroscorotic disease, there have been many research findings. I thought you might want to discuss some of those developments. Let's start with updates to the anatomical aspects of the disease model itself. Okay. So one of the things I find is missing from the discussion is that of the glycocalyx. And, you know, every time you look at a textbook that describes atherosclerosis, we see basically the blood vessel and then the cells that line the blood vessels, the endothelial cells, and then you just see the blood flowing over these endothelial cells. What we've completely neglected is this layer called the glycocalyx. And this is sort of a brush border that lines every living thing, every living cell, and it lines the cells of the blood vessel. And the way I like to think about it would be, you know, like moss in a stream. So if you've looked at rocks that have this layer of moss, it's nice and soft and green. And as the water is running over it, it's kind of drifting along with the flow of the water. And that's really what your glycocalyx is like. And it's really important because this acts as a protective layer for your cells. And it's very rich in these special substances called glycosaminoglycans. And essentially, they're protein and carbohydrate structures. And if there's more protein to it than carbohydrate, you call them proteoglycans. If there's more of the carbohydrate components, they're glycoproteins. But nonetheless, these molecules have very strong negative charges. And they also hide a lot of these adhesion molecules that signal to immune cells. So they harbor all these adhesion molecules and coagulation factors, these strong negative charges. They also are anchored to plasma proteins. And the plasma proteins like albumin and so forth actually form part of the glycocalyx. So we often think of the proteins just floating along in the plasma. But we have a significant component that's actually hooked on to this glycocalyx. And the other end of the glycocalyx is tethered to the cytoskeleton of the cell. And this cytoskeleton is in contact with the nucleus, in contact with signaling molecules, integrins, and so forth. So what we have now is this structure. And it looks just like a brush border, but, you know, acts as a communication bridge between the outside of the cell and the inside of the cell. So that very important component of the endothelial lining in blood vessels is completely ignored when people discuss, you know, the functioning of endothelial cells and also, you know, the development of atherosclerosis. I agree. One rarely hears about it. But given that that's the case, could you tell us why that's important? In other words, how does or how should this change clinical practice in medicine? Well, as I said, it acts as a permeability barrier. And in fact, back in the old days when they were just looking at cells under the microscope, they would see the blood flowing through a blood vessel and they would see what they called an exclusion zone. So basically at the very edges of the vessel, there'd be this zone where no red blood cells would be flowing. And people wondered about that. And it turns out that that really was the first indication of this glycocalyx. And this is very significant because now you realize that those cells do not come into contact with the endothelium at all. They're always excluded. It's kind of like having a bumper, you know, that prevents them from being in direct contact. And then within the glycocalyx, we have all kinds of receptors that are important. So we have things like selectins and immunoglobulins. And these are very important for immune function, for coagulation, blood coagulation, clotting. And any damage to that glycocalyx is definitely going to affect the functioning of the microcirculation. And it's also going to impact the endothelial cells itself. Because I mentioned how it's tethered to the interior of the cell. And it actually acts as a signal sensor for those cells to make nitric oxide. And this is something that's very important for helping your blood vessels relax, vasodilate, right? So you don't have like a very constricted blood vessels that would lead to hypertension, for example. So when we say that a cell, the endothelial lining of the blood vessels have endothelial dysfunction, in essence, we're talking about a damaged glycocalyx here. I can see why it's certainly important. Could you touch on how you think this should change medical practice, if it should at all? Well, I think some of the things that we should be talking to patients about in terms of glycocalyx health would be to reduce the substances that would impact the damage of glycocalyx, right? So for example, high blood sugar conditions or hyperglycemia can damage that layer. And we can also see that in hospitalized patients especially, a lot of times in the ICU, we would give rapid fluid administration. We have patients that are maybe not doing so well, blood pressure is low. And we think in terms of fluid resuscitation. So there's been this tendency to just kind of put the IVs in and flush the patient with lots of fluids. But that actually damages the glycocalyx. So if we have a situation of hypervolemia, we're going to actually make it worse. We're going to worsen the endothelial dysfunction, worsen stress for the patient as well. And then managing blood pressure to make sure that we keep that glycocalyx healthy, making sure that the nutrition status is good in the patient. Because I mentioned how a lot of these plasma proteins like albumin are actually connected or bound to the glycocalyx. And when you have low plasma proteins, you have also a dysfunctional glycocalyx. Really interesting. What other anatomical updates should we be aware of with respect to arthrosclerotic disease? Are there other such things we should be thinking about? Yeah, so besides the glycocalyx, now we're going inwards, right? So we're looking at that brush border. And now as we look at the endothelial layer itself, that layer right next to where the blood is flowing is called the tunica intima. And if you look at drawings in most textbooks, it's going to be represented as one cell thick. So we just have this one cell layer of the tunica intima. But it turns out that in coronary arteries, this is not the case. So as we grow, that one cell layer does thicken and we have multi-layered tunica intima in the coronary arteries. How would you characterize the significance of this? Well, if you think about a unilayer, then you realize that probably we can get nutrients and we can get oxygen in via diffusion. But when we're talking about a multi-layer, then you realize simple diffusion is not going to be enough to nourish those cells. So we're going to need some other kind of blood supply, right? And, you know, these would be tiny blood vessels from within the lumen, the hollow part of the blood vessel that would supply the artery. And these little blood vessels are actually feeding the main coronary blood vessel. It's kind of interesting to think of it that way. But with a multi-layer, you're not going to have simple diffusion supply the needs of those cells in the tunica intima. And so you're going to have another route of delivery, which also means another route of access to the vessel wall, right? And then the other thing is that when we talk about plaques and atherosclerosis, they're usually seen within the deeper cell layers of the intima. So we're now, you know, thinking about maybe a more involved process of plaque development. It was always just the thought of, you know, there's inflammation and then these monocytes or immune cells migrate to that section of the blood wall and they penetrate that single layer and then they, you know, bring about the disease process. But here, because it's occurring deep within the intima, several cell layers in, it's actually closer to the middle portion of the blood vessel, right? The tunica media, which is where the smooth muscle cells are. And so now it's making us think that, okay, this process is not just an outside-in process. It also has inside-out components because we see that some of these smooth muscle cells are actually changing phenotypically into immune cells, into macrophages, right? So that, you know, we think of the monocytes and immune cells coming in from the outside when they may actually be from within the cell wall as well. Besides the glycocalyx and the updated view of the tunic intima that you just shared, there's yet another anatomic highlight to blood vessels that I think you might want to point out. So what is that? I started talking about it when I talked about the little blood vessels that supply the tunica intima of your coronary arteries, right? And these make up what we call the vasa vesorum. And these vasa vesorum, the term actually says, it means vessel of the vessel. And these are blood vessels that bring blood and supply, you know, your regular blood vessels with nutrients and oxygen. So the vasa vesorum are end vessels and they typically are what we say fenestrated, which means that they are leaky. They have big gaps between them. And we have different types of vasa vesorum. We have arterial vasa vesorum or arterial end vessels. We have venous end vessels and we also have lymphatic end vessels. And they supply both sides of the vessel wall. So from the lumen side where the blood is flowing, we have the vasa vesorum interna. And from the opposite end near the tunica adventitia, we have the vasa vesorum externa. So all these things that I've mentioned, the glycocalyx, right? And, you know, this revised view of the tunica intima where it's not really just one cell thick, but several layers of cells. And then also bringing in the structures that we call the vasa vesorum, these additional blood vessels at both ends of the coronary artery. We see that none of this is really being discussed in medical schools. They haven't updated it in the anatomy of the coronary arteries that students are studying. Doctors are not talking about this and many people are unaware that these things exist. But the anatomy contributes a lot to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. So when we talk about, let's say, the vasa vesorum, now there, as I mentioned, there's arterial, venous, and lymphatic. So the arterial vasa vesorum, these tiny blood vessels, they actually supply and nourish the outer two-thirds of the blood vessel wall, the tunica adventitia in the media. And then the internal part is, you know, nourished by the vasa vesorum interna. But the other thing that's really important is, especially on the back end, the vasa vesorum externa, this allows the tunica adventitia, the outside layer, the outermost layer of the blood vessel to become a lounge, kind of an airport lounge for very interesting cells, and many of them immune cells, right? Because these tiny blood vessels from the back end are able to, you know, be a passageway for immune cells to access the blood vessel wall. So we're always talking about things from the lumen side where the blood is flowing. But really, these blood vessels from the back end are portals for lots of very interesting immune cells, dendritic cells. We have T cells and B cells, right? And maybe some monocytes as well in there. Fibroblasts also start to, you know, populate that area. So the adventitia becomes this lounge again, and it starts to organize. And it organizes into essentially tiny lymph nodes. You could think of it that way. There are follicular centers. And these lymph nodes start to form, and especially in cases where we have a lot of plaque burden, you're going to see well-organized follicular centers, or think of them as little lymph nodes within the vessel wall right next to where you see the plaque. Hmm. Does this essentially account for how the vasovasorium contributes to our understanding of the development of arthrosclerosis, or is that yet another aspect? I think it's very important in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis because if we think of atherosclerosis as an immune disorder, which, you know, I wish that people would spend more time talking about the immune aspects because I think the inflammatory aspects of atherosclerosis are way more interesting than just, you know, cholesterol. And cholesterol itself, its role in atherosclerosis is also, in my view, from an inflammatory viewpoint, right? From an immune function viewpoint. So with this vasovasorium allowing passageway for a multitude of different immune cells to be present, then we can organize a clear immune response in the vessel wall. Okay. So again, you hear people talk about monocytes and macrophages in atherosclerosis, the most famous, you know, being the foam cells. But we've known for a long time that you don't see these plaques without T-cells, right? And everywhere you look, when you see a plaque, you're going to find these follicular centers. You're going to find a cuff of T-cells there. And the T-cells are very important in the development and progression of the plaque. So this is an immune reaction that you're seeing. So that's a very thorough, but also very interesting description of what's going on, at least to some extent. And as you say, it's rarely discussed in the clinical setting. Something that is talked about a lot in a clinical setting in context of arthroscorotic disease is the phrase endothelial dysfunction. And this is discussed as a primary initiator of disease. What exactly is endothelial dysfunction and what are some of its downstream effects? Well, and this is why we needed to talk about the glycocalyx first, because you really start with glycocalyx damage and, you know, shedding of the glycocalyx. The glycocalyx is shed all the time. But, you know, when we have accelerated and widespread shedding of this protective layer, then you expose the endothelial cells lining the blood vessel to, first of all, adhesion factors that will attract and hold on to or stick on to immune cells. And also a lot of these coagulation factors that were hidden in the glycocalyx. And you expose the endothelial cell really to the red blood cells that are flowing by and also the immune cells that are going by. And now we also have a break in the communication between the outside and the inside of the cell, right? And I mentioned that the glycocalyx is attached to this cytoskeleton of the cell and is in contact with the nucleus. And therefore, it impacts, you know, gene transcription and expression of different enzymes and different inflammatory cytokines that now the endothelial cell will start to express. The other thing is that that glycocalyx is really important for the generation of nitric oxide. And when you damage the glycocalyx, you're essentially cutting off healthy nitric oxide production by the blood vessel wall. And this leads to a decrease in vasodilation or relaxation of the artery. We get a lot more constriction, right? And this, again, causes more stress and oxidative stress to the endothelial cells. And then there are other factors, right? We have a lot of oxidative stress. I think one of the main things that causes oxidative stress would be your renin-androtensin aldosterone system. And this is linked to a system in your body that's primarily for conservation of blood volume. But when it's activated, it's also linked to the production of a lot of free radicals, or what we call reactive oxygen species, right? It's one of the most well-known producers of reactive oxygen species. So when that system, that RAS system, is not well-controlled or is dysfunctional, we're also going to impact the health of the endothelial cells. So in essence, anything that disrupts the normal functioning of the endothelial cells would be called endothelial dysfunction. But I think the biggest component is going to be a dysfunctional or damaged glycocalyx. Right? And you think about, you know, sheer stress. So I described water flowing and the moss kind of drifting along with the flow of water, right? And that flow of water keeps the glycocalyx healthy. When we have areas of low flow, low blood flow, then we have actually marked shedding of the glycocalyx. So where would we see that? Typically, it's where we see most of plaques being formed. That would be at the bifurcation of vessels, right? So when you think about sheer stress, everybody talks about sheer stress. And how does that link to the formation of plaques? How does that link to, you know, a dysfunctional blood vessel? Well, if we have a blood vessel that is now splitting into two or what we say bifurcating into two, then we disrupt the flow of blood. And in the area where the blood flow is now split between the two vessels, instead of a nice, smooth, linear flow, right? Like a stream. And you see the, again, the healthy glycocalyx drifting along with that flow. Now we have oscillatory flow because you, at the split, you're going to have little eddies of water. So like little vortexes or vortices of water. That is going to decrease sheer stress, right? Because, you know, now we have the oscillatory flow. We don't have that straight tangential force on the vessel wall. So now we have decreased sheer stress. And with the decreased sheer stress, you're going to actually have increased shedding of the glycocalyx. And those are the areas that are most vulnerable to plaque formation. So it's a direct connection between where we have a healthy glycocalyx and where we have plaque. Really interesting. Earlier, you touched on the inflammatory aspects of arthroscorotic disease, and you've linked arthroscorotic disease to autoimmunity also earlier today, but also in one of your podcast episodes. And Vivian has a very good podcast. We'll mention that later. So could you elaborate a little bit on the link between arthroscorotic disease and autoimmunity? Yeah. Well, let's explore the inflammation process a little bit more. You know, we always divide it into two arms, the innate arm and the adaptive arm. And the innate arm is your immediate, you know, to the rescue system, where immune cells jump into action to try to defend you from, let's say, invasion by some germ, some bacteria, right? So when we have lipoproteins, like your LDL floating around, generally they're made by your body. They should be considered part of you. They're endogenous to your body. And your immune system should not be, you know, paying much attention to them because they're just part of you. But if we were to modify those lipoproteins in any way, so maybe we change the structure of some of the proteins that are linked to the lipoprotein, or we change some of the membrane structure within the lipoprotein itself. Now it becomes something that is not familiar to your immune cells. So your macrophages, for example, are looking at those modified lipoproteins and going, is this part of us or is this part of the enemy? Now in nature, we're so used to thinking about human lipoproteins, but, you know, lipoproteins exist everywhere. And lots of bacteria and viruses, they have lipoproteins. They're quite different from our lipoproteins, but they have these motifs, you know, these sequences in them that can be recognized by our immune cells, like the macrophages, right? And once you've modified our own lipoproteins, we may have motifs in there that mimic some of these bacterial lipoproteins, for example. This immediately is recognized and sets up an inflammatory response. And, you know, one of the things that will happen is that, you know, your cell, your immune cell is going to identify that as, you know, foreign and hopefully phagocytose it or swallow it up. The other thing it's doing as it's chewing up the lipoprotein, the modified lipoprotein, lipoprotein is it's kind of taking the fragments of it and presenting it to cells of the adaptive system. So you are your lymphocytes now. And they're walking around to the different lymphocytes saying, do you recognize this? And inevitably you're going to get a T cell that will recognize some component of that lipoprotein, right? And now it's going to react to this lipoprotein, which it normally would not react to. So this antigen that is presented to the T cell is what we call a neoantigen. It was something that was once endogenous and a part of your body, but once modified, it's not recognized. And so now we've made a new antigen, used to be part of you. Now it's sort of, and doesn't look very familiar. And now we present this to your T cells, which then react to it. So we would say that's an autoimmune response. We're reacting to something that is self, but it's not recognized as self. And I think this is what is going on with atherosclerosis. So it's two components. You have the autoinflammatory component with the innate system. First of all, recognizing that there's something different about these lipoproteins, right? And it reacts immediately. So that's an autoinflammatory response. But then it brings it back to the lymphocytes, to the T cells and says, yeah, you know, let's look at this closer. And now we start to identify the modified lipoproteins as, you know, an antigen that is foreign to us. STEM Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, locomotion, healthspan, resilience, and performance. Given the link to inflammation that you have so nicely explicated, what therapeutic developments have been studied to prevent arthroscragic disease? Are there some specific therapeutic developments of interest here? Yeah, I think that in the last, I would say, 10 years at least, maybe a bit more, I think the shift has been towards looking at it as an inflammatory process, looking at the autoimmune aspects of it rather than just cholesterol. Because as we said from the very beginning, you know, that whole cholesterol hypothesis hasn't panned out completely. And even though we have lowered people's cholesterol levels to, you know, almost non-existent in some cases, it hasn't actually gotten rid of atherosclerotic heart disease. So they've shifted their attention to looking at the inflammatory aspects. And we've had a few studies. Cantos was looking at the inflammatory cytokine IL-1 beta, and, you know, it used an antibody against IL-1. And then we also had, more famously, I think, the RESCU study, which used an IL-6 or interleukin-6 antibody. And the idea was here that now we identify this as an inflammatory process, and we know that these cytokines are involved in inflammatory signaling. And so, you know, what if we were to actually get rid of these cytokines or the effects of these cytokines, like IL-1 beta, like interleukin-6? And I would say it's been mixed. You know, they've shown some improvement or decreased risk in terms of developing atherosclerosis. But I guess I was a bit surprised that they took that route. Because, you know, when we're looking at inflammatory cytokines, it's really difficult because they have both homeostatic function and inflammatory function, right? So we're so used to thinking about these cytokines as being pro-inflammatory. But take something like interleukin-6, classically very important in homeostatic functioning. And, you know, you talk a lot about muscle, for example. So if you go to the gym and you work out and you do your resistance training, right? We need that interleukin-6 signaling to really elicit hypertrophy in those muscles. And if we did not have interleukin-6 signaling, then we would miss out on that, right? So there are important homeostatic functions with these interleukins. And so just to get rid of them, I thought, and that was an interesting approach. I wonder why they thought that would be highly successful. And I think that's where, you know, the different silos that we have in medicine and sometimes in science, right? Where we're only fixated on what we specialize in. Oh, so true. Right. And so we think, oh, well, okay, inflammation is the problem. So interleukins, let's just get rid of these. And I'm like, well, wait, they do a lot of very different things. And it's very, very, very tissue dependent and time dependent, you know? So I'm not surprised that it hasn't made a huge, huge impact, you know, just to get rid of the effects of these inflammatory cytokines. I mean, they've used other anti-inflammatory substances like colchicine, which is a drug that's used in the treatment of galt, for example. And, you know, they have seen that when you lower inflammation, you do lower the risk, right? But I think they probably need a different approach than just wiping out, you know, the cytokines. Hmm. That's interesting. And there's also been attempts, as I understand it, at actually developing a vaccine against atherosclerosis. Can you tell us about that? That's also another fascinating development. Yeah, I would say, again, in maybe the last 10 years, maybe a bit more, there's been this interest in making a vaccine against atherosclerosis, because after all, if we know that it's an inflammatory disease and there are autoimmune aspects, could we perhaps make these antigens and, you know, kind of get people to develop immunity against atherosclerosis? And again, it's way more complex. It sounds like a good idea, but we haven't sorted out the different immune cell interactions in atherosclerosis. So it's very complex. We have different subsets of T cells, and we know generally that certain subsets are more inflammatory and are linked to the disease. And then we have Tregs, which are more anti-inflammatory, and they drop out when we have more plaque burden. So the ratio between the more inflammatory subsets of T cells and the more homeostatic T cells, you know, that's important, but how do we regulate that? How do we manipulate that? And in terms of B cells, there are different subsets of B cells as well. So more famously, we have the B1 and B2 types of B cells. And the B1s generally, again, are more involved in homeostatic maintenance of tissues, and they form antibodies, mostly IgM-type antibodies that seem to confer some kind of protection already, right, in your body. So it seems that when these B1 cells make IgM, the IgM actually bind to these oxidized lipoproteins. And when they do that, they actually prevent your macrophages, for example, from actually swallowing up these lipoproteins. And therefore, they decrease form cell formation. So they're atheroprotective in a sense. But then we also have, you know, different immunoglobulins. So the IgGs, for example, and also to a certain extent, IgA have been associated with more severe atherosclerosis. So we have to sort that out and understand what's happening in terms of antibody formation, right? Your body has some means because it's making some protective antibodies against, you know, the formation of plaques. But then certain other antibodies seem to promote the formation of plaques. So while I think this is interesting, we have a whole lot to sort out before we can, I think, make huge progress in developing a vaccine against atherosclerosis. Yes, I'm sure you're right. Another recent development has been an appreciation of the role of clonal hematopoiesis in arthroscorotic disease. What is clonal hematopoiesis? Yeah. Okay. So this is interesting because they've recently realized that we have these mutations that occur over time throughout the lifespan. And your hematopoietic stem cells, which are in your bone marrow, these stem cells, they actually accumulate mutations. These are not passed on. In other words, they don't come from your parents. But over time with exposure to the environment, maybe to diet and so forth, they accumulate these mutations that then are proliferated. So that's the clonal expansion part. We actually make more of these stem cells that carry those mutations with them. And there's something called CHIP, the acronym CHIP. It stands for clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential. So CHIP. And CHIP is seen in 10 to 15% of those over the age of 70. So we find this CHIP, these clones, CHIP clones in people as they age. And the older you are, the more of these you accumulate. Now, there's a small risk of cancer, of leukemias from CHIP. It's a very small risk. But interestingly, they've noted that having CHIP doubles the risk of atherosclerosis and stroke, right? And I think they're trying to figure that out. What we do know is that CHIP alters the inflammatory profiles, the cytokine profiles in that person, right? So we have somehow skewed the range of inflammatory cytokines in people carrying CHIP. And that might be what is increasing the risk of atherosclerosis. That's an interesting explanation, Vivian. And it's something I hadn't known about. We've covered a whole range of topics on atherosclerotic disease today. And really, we kind of focused on the inflammatory aspects of the disease. What are some actionable takeaways now that our listeners can apply from today's discussion? We've had a really good discussion and a nice explication. But tell us what people could do that would improve their situation. Well, I hope the takeaway is that basically the accumulation of inflammatory signatures within the cells in our body can translate into epigenetic changes that we now reproduce, right? And become more evident phenotypically as we age. So this is in talking about CHIP, for example. And while we're always excited about drug developments on how to maybe lower our risk for heart disease, right? I think the behavioral and environmental components have been under-emphasized. My take has always been that the body is so amazing and continues to surprise me every day. There are things that occur in our body within cells that, you know, it sometimes feels like science fiction. So there's this versatility in the body and this ability to adapt, this flexibility to different situations, right? And also the ability to heal. And we, I think, neglect some of the most important things we can do for our health. Things like nutrition and exercise and sleep, managing our stress. So I think you go to your doctor and they'll go, yeah, it'd be nice if you exercise and yeah, maybe eat healthier. There's nothing more specific than that though, because we don't invest money and research and time and resources into the impact of nutrition and exercise and sleep, for example. How do these things, you know, what pathways are involved when these aspects of our lives are disturbed? And how do we correct that? And how do we help patients manage those aspects of their lives, right? And then the other thing that's really important is I try to emphasize to my patients and almost to everyone that I talk to. When you hear the word metabolism, you should immediately think at the same time, immune regulation, both macro and micro. You hear metabolism and you should be thinking about your immune system immediately because they are linked. They are intricately linked. And we use metabolic pathways to turn on immune pathways. And immune pathways will change our metabolic pathways. So those are so intricately linked that if we focused on managing our metabolism, and I guess the best way to do that is to look at nutrient input, right? Nutrient management. But also, you know, the things that impact metabolism would be things like your circadian rhythm and so forth. So if we invested time and money in that, I think we would get rid of most chronic diseases that plague us today. Concur. And very well said. Now for our last couple questions. Usually these are semi-personal questions, so you can avoid them if you wish. Something we did not talk about during your earlier interview is your deep interest in dance. And aside from work, this seems to be a huge part of your life. How much time do you spend dancing and generally working in that area? So I've had an injury, but before I did, I was taking classes maybe 20 hours a week. And that was just class. Yeah, and then if I added training on top of that, it would be close to 30 hours a week. But as I said, I've had an injury and mostly because I was overdoing it. So I've had an overuse injury. And now I'm supposed to be dancing no more than two hours a week. I'm pushing it as usual. I'm probably doing about seven. And it's because when I was younger, I mostly did ballet and jazz and modern and African and some Afro-Caribbean styles. But I've switched recently to commercial styles. So I just feel like I need more time to train in the new styles. What are commercial styles? I don't understand that jargon. Okay. So commercial open style is basically what you would need. You would need a whole range of different dance genres to be able to work as a professional dancer. So if you're dancing in a show or in a commercial or with a music artist, right? Generally, they expect you to be fluent in street jazz, jazz funk, hip hop, popping, locking, and heels probably if you're a female. But also, you know, sometimes males also do heels. So you're expected to train your body. And the idea is you're making your body an instrument because you need to be able to express the music and the choreographer's vision. So you're going to need as much vocabulary and styles as possible. So when they say commercial open style, it's essentially you need to do everything, including contemporary, probably some modern. Some people include tap, but I don't have a tap background. But you need that range. And it's, again, for two reasons. Because if you're going to work professionally, then you need that range because whatever show you're in, you should be able to adapt. Whatever gig you have, you should be able to catch the choreography in 10, 20 minutes and perform, you know, in the next hour, right? And you need to be fluent in those styles. But the other thing that's prominent, I guess, in that world would be these dance battles. And I don't know. Have you ever watched a dance battle? No. Okay. They're fascinating. They're new to me as well. I think the most famous one would be the Red Bull dance competitions, those dance battles. Very famous. And I think there's another one called Summer Dance Fever. And that's in Amsterdam once or twice a year. So those are the big dance battles. And essentially, you basically face another dancer. And very interesting rules. You generally don't know what music is going to be played. So there's a DJ. And that DJ will just start playing music. And they have a mix ready. And you have to take turns. And you get a certain amount of time per dancer. And you just get that music. One, two, three, go. And you really start to perform. And the battle is not just on what you can do in terms of technique. It's how you phrase the music. How you are actually choreographing in the moment. So we call it freestyle. So you have to respond to the music. And, you know, granted, a lot of the competitors spend hours listening to music just to familiarize themselves with different genres. But a lot of what you hear is going to be completely new. But you're so attuned. And you've had so much training that you get to a point where you just respond. You almost anticipate the music. It's amazing to watch because they match. If you watch the top dances, they match the music perfectly. And they've not heard it before. And they don't have any time to practice beforehand. It's here's the music. Go. And you compete that way, right? So you really need, I guess you need not only the vocabulary, you need the musicality. You need the textures, the phrasing. So I think that's what is challenging about open style in commercial dance. You're really passionate about dance. It seems like it's much more than just a hobby or sort of a side interest. In a nutshell, why are you doing this? You know, what does dance mean to you? It seems like it's very time consuming. I love it. And I think anything you love should nourish and support you. But it, for me anyway, also needs to challenge you. It has to make you reach for a better version of yourself, right? Otherwise, we would just flatline. We'd stop growing. And then we'd be complacent. And I know there are people who maybe they do sports and they have games or whatever on the weekends and they do it, you know, with company and it's fun. But for me, you know, something you love has to push you a little, make you uncomfortable, grow to a better version of yourself. And I think that's what dance does for me. And also is a way for me to reflect on myself because your relation to what you love also helps you see yourself better. And so you can use that relationship to learn about yourself and choose to grow and develop. And it can become a form of personal revelation and development, right? So, for example, I can remember a class I went to and the teacher, you know, the choreography she set was very difficult for me. It was very fast. It was not music that I was familiar with. I didn't know the moves. I didn't have that dance vocabulary. And so it was a huge challenge for me. So you learn the choreography in a very short period of time. And then what they do is they get you up there to perform and everybody's got their cameras up and, you know, they're posting this on IG and Instagram. So there's a lot of pressure. So you have a short time to learn it, get it in your body, perfect it, and then you're supposed to perform. So I was just hoping I wouldn't be called. But yeah, of course, she called me and I went up and it was a small group. It was, I think, three of us that were called up to perform. So there's no way you can hide. And I was waiting for the music to start. And I just caught a glimpse of myself in the mirror. And I just looked at myself. I looked terrified and totally not confident in my head. I looked worried. And I just saw myself in the mirror. And in that moment, I thought, you're going to go up like that? You're really going to go up like that? And something in me just said, nah, nah, I'm not going up like that. So I just stepped up and, you know, music came on and I went for it. And I made so many mistakes and I knew I made mistakes and I kept going. And there's something in dance they say you have to fight. They like to see that fight in you even when you don't have it. And I'll say I fought through that whole piece, right? And I finished it. And there's a sense of being really vulnerable, having your mistakes in front of everyone. And they're filming a hit and they may post it. And being willing to not be perfect. And for me, growing up, I grew up in Singapore and there was a lot of pressure to be perfect. That was a big step for me to allow myself to not be perfect and maybe extend a little bit of grace and generosity to, you know, making mistakes. So I think for me, dance makes me look at how I show up in the world. So it's not just, okay, I went up and I performed. It's like, when do I do that? When do I hold back in my life? When do I step up with my head down? And if I see myself doing that in dance, there's a good chance I'm doing it in some other area of my life. And, you know, I go home and I think about that. And I think about those areas. And then I go up and I fight. So that's what dance means to me. Well, it's a great explanation. And I suppose you're going to send us the link for the show notes of your performance. Absolutely not. Oh, but hold your head up. You know, there's one thing about like fighting through the moment. There's another thing about reproducing it and extending the moment of pure terror. I understand. Well, Vivian, this has been just great. And you provided lots of fascinating information, which is, unfortunately, rarely discussed in the context of clinical medicine. So thank you so much for joining us today on STEM Talk. It was my pleasure. Yeah. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. Well, that was a lot of fun. I hope you all enjoyed today's discussion with Vivian. But I also want to emphasize how important this episode is. Many people will not be aware that they have heart disease until they actually have an event, which is why heart disease is often referred to as the silent killer. Today, we took a deep dive into the anatomic highlights associated with blood vessels and arthrosclerosis. Many of these topics are largely overlooked in medical school and certainly in clinical practice. Vivian also produces a really good podcast called VL for Vivian Lowe, MD. So the name of the podcast is, again, VLMD Rounds, like when a physician makes the grand rounds. VLMD Rounds, where she takes a deep dive into many important topics around health and wellness. In addition to her podcast, Vivian's website is very informative. The URL for the website is vivianlowe, MD, dot com. And again, remember, it's Vivian spelled V-Y-V-Y-A-N-E. This is Ken Ford signing off and saying goodbye until we meet again on STEM Talk. Thank you for listening to STEM Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, STEMtalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview. Thank you.