 Welcome to STEM Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hello, I am David LeMay and I'm stepping in today to help host today's episode of STEM Talk. Joining me is the main man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all of the guests who appear on the STEM Talk show. Hello, David. Great to be here. For regular listeners of STEM Talk, you may recall that David was our guest on STEM Talk episode 69. David is a physical medicine and rehabilitation physician who lives at Pensacola practice just a few blocks from IHMC, where we're sitting now. His practice focuses on lifestyle and performance medicine. He is also a visiting research scientist here at IHMC. Thank you, Ken, for inviting me today to co-host the interview with Dr. Charles Sirhan, a good friend of mine who is a Harvard professor best known for his discovery of specialized pro-resolution mediators. SPMs are molecules that can activate natural resolution of inflammation and help to avoid anti-inflammatory drugs. The discovery of SPMs has been described as spurring a paradigm shift in our understanding of inflammation and human disease. Charles is the Simon Gelman professor of anesthesia at Harvard Medical School and the director of the Center of Experimental Therapeutics and Reperfusion Injury at Brigham and Women's Hospital. He is also a co-director of the Brigham Research Institute. Before we get to our interview with Charles, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to STEM Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all of the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the wittiest and most lavishly praise-filled reviews to read on STEM Talk. As always, if you hear your reviews read on STEM Talk, just contact us at stemtalk at IHMC.us to claim your official STEM Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker NORSE SOUL, titled STEM Talk, the best science podcast out there. It reads, I have been a long-time listener to STEM Talk, and it just keeps getting better with age. Not only do Ken and Don and Marcus do an excellent job of presenting interesting and thought-provoking topics, but they also delve into the personal stories of the thought leaders they interview. Your recent interview with Dr. Nicholas Norwitz was so packed with groundbreaking revelations, I had to keep skipping back to re-listen to segments. As a physician, I'm impressed and encouraged by the energy and curiosity that Dr. Norwitz brings to his research. Thinking outside of the accepted science and constantly investigating the outliers and the exceptions is how progress is made in science. From the marvels of Roman concrete to next-generation spacesuits and everything about optimizing human nutrition, I will keep coming back to STEM Talk on a weekly basis. Thank you, Norsk Soul, and thanks to our other STEM Talk listeners who have helped STEM Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now on to today's interview with Dr. Charles Serhan. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. Charles, I understand you were born in Brooklyn and that your father was a French-Lebanese and your mother was Italian and both were born in New York City. As a youth, you were quite passionate about music. You learned to play the vibraphone in junior high school and became so accomplished that you played professionally for about a year before going to college. So how did you end up as a scientist rather than a musician? Well, I felt and I still feel today that I could help many more people via science than I ever could in playing music. Although, I have to say that I still love playing and I feel very comfortable behind the vibes and it's like second nature to me. What kind of vibraphone did you play? What kind of vibraphone did you play? I have a Musser, if that's what you mean. Yeah. Yeah, an M55. And those are known as the one-nighters because you could travel around with them. But someday, I will get the gold set of vibes, which is the studio set. Still looking forward to that. There used to be a guy up in the Boston area. I don't know if he's still up there. Gary Burton. Oh, sure. One of my heroes. Yeah, I was in the music business in the early 70s and we used to book him and he was a very talented person. Four Mallet Pro. Yes, I like to play some Gary Burton tunes. He was dean of Berkeley, as you know, for some time and a fantastic musician. And he comes from the genre of big band. But his quartet work and the recordings he did with Chick Corea are just phenomenal. Right. There was a period when he was really amazing. He was experienced and skilled and still youthful at one point, you know. And it was a wonderful time with Chick Corea and others. He's etched into my memory. Oh, yeah. I would always turn to play with my group when I was in school one of his tunes called Sea Journey. Yes. And fantastic. And fantastic. You know, you mentioned that you had always liked science and had done well in science in school, which doesn't surprise me. What was it about science that you particularly enjoyed? You said that you felt you could do more good in science for more people than in music. But, you know, was there a particular thing about studying science that you really mostly enjoyed? I really enjoy the rigor and objectivity and the ability to test hypotheses and do experiments. Doing experiments is, yeah, nothing more fun than that. After you were a professional musician, you went to the State University of New York at Stony Brook. Yeah, I was lucky. Yeah. And you studied biochemistry and immunohistochemistry there? Biochemistry was my major and chemistry. The histochemistry side came in my research project. I was really fortunate to work with a very good immunohistochemist in the Department of Pathology. Yeah. And for people in terms of the audience and understanding, this is something that's used to diagnose cancer and predict treatment responses and likely prognosis of the disease. In terms of your switch from, you know, musician to biomedical science, was there anything that carried over in terms of the music side that you felt carried into the scientific side? Yes, that's an interesting point. Yeah, many things that I learned in music translated to science. For example, if you really wanted to play well, you had to study and practice your scales. And you did this routinely, all musicians do. And it's like learning a language. And in science, the same is true. You need to learn the language and study and practice every day. Makes sense. It does, for sure. So after earning your bachelor's degree, one of your professors convinced you to head off to New York University for your master's and PhD. And also, you worked in the lab of Gerald Wiesman at Woods Hole Marine Biological Laboratory. This all seems like it must have been a major move in your development. Can you talk about that experience and how it all came about? Well, Ken, this was what set me on my path. And I was very, very fortunate. So I'll describe this in a nutshell. I was very enthusiastic as an undergraduate. So I took graduate school courses as an undergraduate. And one of the courses was in the biophysics of membranes. And we used as a compendium in reading text, Gerald Wiesman's book that he put together called Cell Membranes, which was a group of articles that were at the scientific American level that were published in hospital practice. The other graduate school course that I took as an undergraduate was in cell cycle kinetics. And I really enjoyed mathematical modeling. And that professor, Professor Edgman's, encouraged me to paraphrase him, do something serious. So I was very fortunate to go to NYU and get a NIH pre-doctoral fellowship at the time. And I was in the first year of medical school class. And Gerald Wiesman came to give a lecture on the cell biology of leukocytes. And he had just returned from Paris. I remember this clearly. He had this movie of leukocytes chemotaxing. And I just thought that was so cool. So I went up to speak to him after class. He said, oh, come up to my office. And his office was in Bellevue Hospital, where his lab was, Department of Medicine. So I went up to see him. And he said, oh, what are you doing this summer? So I said, I haven't made any plans yet. He goes, good, because you're coming to Woods Hole, the marine biological laboratories at Woods Hole. Wow. This was incredible. What an opportunity. We worked on white blood cells, leukocytes from dogfish. But the entire environment was really stimulating. And I had an opportunity to work that summer with Benk Samuelson's daughter, who was working with us in the lab. And then Samuelson came at the end of the summer. We were really lucky. We won the NBL award that year. And I presented on behalf of the lab. That was fun. So he asked me to tell him about what we were doing. And I did. And he looked at me and said, Charles, when you finish, there'll be a place for you in Stockholm. I said, wow. So I hadn't really thought about doing something like that. But it changed all my plans. And I decided, yes, I'm going to Stockholm. I'll finish early. And I was really fortunate to continue a collaboration between the Weissman lab and with Samuelson. And two of my publications with Samuelson that were part of my thesis were cited in Benk Samuelson's Nobel lecture. I was very proud of that. And I'm still proud of that today. Yeah, that's amazing. And this kind of led you into the focus on neutrophil membrane remodeling for your PhD. Is that right? Yes. I was really fascinated with the process of phagocytosis and how these cells defend us by seeking out bacteria and foreign invaders. And then quickly, in a matter of seconds and minutes, phagocytize these organisms and then destroy them. To do that, neutrophils have to very, very rapidly remodel their membranes, make new phospholipids to expand the surface area to be able to engulf and form a phagolysosomal vacuole. That they then pour the armamentarium in them that break down the bacteria and kill them. And this is a very well-known area of medicine and biology. And that process was discovered by Michnikov in the late 1800s. And he received a Nobel Prize in physiology of medicine for that discovery and the innate immune response. Yeah, it's incredible. And I understand that after you earned your PhD, you had mentioned the Karolinska Institute. Is that where you met your future wife? Yes. Samuelson used to joke that, said, oh yeah, Charlie was very productive. He even met his wife at the Karolinska. Yes, we met on the cafeteria line during lunch one day. And my wife, because of her, was studying medicine and finishing up her medical degree at the time. It seems clear that you are quite fortunate and have been quite fortunate to have a number of strong and effective mentors where you were in school. One who stands out is Michael Heidelberg, a two-time winner of the Lasker Award in medicine. He stands out particularly because of the advice he gave you, I think, on how to be a good scientist. What was his advice and what impact did it have? Well, Dr. Heidelberg was really special. And he was an organic chemist by training. And someone in the dean's office noticed that I had a background in chemistry and that I like chemistry. And I remember very clearly this woman, Thalia Kuhn, she said, oh, you should go up and talk with Dr. Heidelberg. He needs someone to help him at this time. And I did and worked with Dr. Heidelberg, just he and I, in this very small lab. His career was at Columbia University. And he was the scientific grandfather of Baruch Benassaroff, who also received a Nobel Prize for his work on antigen antibody combining sites. So one day I asked Dr. Heidelberg about what it took to become a good scientist. And he would always chat with me. And he said two things. Charles, you have to work on something that you're passionate about because this will carry you through the difficult times. And second, write everything down, write all your observations down in your notebook and carry a second notebook that you can jot down your observations and notes. Because in those notes will be your discoveries. And I tried to bring that message to all those that come to work with me in my research program because I found them to be absolutely essential. And I should point out that Dr. Heidelberg at that time was 91 years old. And he lived to 103, and I was the last person to work with him. So I was fortunate in so many ways. He also encouraged me to go to work with Gerald Weissman. That's incredible. And speaking of, you know, in terms of discoveries and amazing scientific progression in the 90s, you discovered what became known as specialized pro-resolution mediators. And most people don't realize, you know, that there's even another pathway to the aspect of inflammation that is active. And since that discovery, you pioneered a new field of research and the utility of SPMs for all kinds of different diseases from chronic pain, rheumatoid arthritis, dental disease, macular degeneration, cardiovascular disease, depression, brain injury, inflammation, conditions like arthritis. I mean, it's basically a necessary part of our body in terms of healing and repair that nobody really knew existed before. Can I jump in here and tell you a little bit about that journey and the journey that we're still on? You're right in that when I was at the Karolinsk Institute, we discovered these new molecules and called them the lipoxins because they were lipoxygenase interaction products. And I was convinced that there were regulatory mechanisms that we didn't know about to control the production and actions of the leukotrienes. And Samuelson, part of his Nobel citation is the discovery of the leukotrienes. And these are very potent molecules that control airway and smooth muscle constriction. And they're important in asthma and in anaphylactic shock. So my reasoning was very simple, that there must be some other molecules produced that could counter-regulate these potent actions, because why would the body make molecules that could ultimately kill us? It didn't make sense in evolution. And we already knew that platelets, when they become activated, they make thromboxane. That was another molecule that Samuelson discovered with Mats Hamburg at Karolinsk. And they did the structural elucidation. Very elegant molecule, only 15 to 30 second half-life in vivo. And this molecule propagates platelet aggregation and is essential for clot formation. So there's another molecule that counteracts the actions of thromboxane called prostacycline, which was discovered by Sir John Vane's group. It's also an arachidonic acid product. It's made by the vascular endothelium. And prostacycline puts the brakes on the platelet aggregation response. So there's already evidence that the physiology of counter-regulation is important in the small molecule lipid mediators. So when I came to Boston, we didn't yet know what the role of the lipoxins were. We needed to do a lot more investigations, physiologic experiments. And then we had a eureka moment with a fellow who came to work with me from Barcelona, Spain, John Claria and I worked together and found that when we take aspirin, it was already known that aspirin would block the production of thromboxane and prostaglandins. And it's widely used as an inhibitor still today. And that was part of the Nobel citation for both Samuelson and Sir John Vane. They shared the prize in 1982 in physiology of medicine. What we found is that aspirin triggered lipid mediators. Not only blocked prostaglandin and thromboxane production, but it also triggered the biosynthesis of what we called aspirin-triggered lipoxins or epimeric lipoxins, lipoxins that were longer acting and a different chirality. This was really exciting. And I then devoted our efforts to making mimetics and stable analogs of the aspirin-triggered lipoxins because we thought this was the stop signal for excessive leukocyte recruitment. And then worked for the next 10 years with Burlix Biosciences and Shearing Germany to advance an aspirin-triggered lipoxin mimetic into clinical trials. And it worked fine. There were four phase one dosing trials and many, many preclinical models and animal models demonstrating that the mimetic that we made with Burlix and Shearing was very potent in reducing GI inflammation. And it was queued up to enter trials for IBD and eventually Crohn's disease. And this was really exciting. But then they took over Shearing and decided that IBD was not on their list of things to do. And they dropped the program, which was so disappointing after having put in such a monumental effort. But we learned a lot during those studies. And that's the knowledge of the aspirin-triggered lipoxins really opened the door to uncovering the resolvents, which are also aspirin-triggered lipid mediators. And that's why when the families of resolvents and pro-resolving mediators that are made during the resolution phase of inflammation became clear as we did the structural elucidation, I went back and classified all these molecules as specialized pro-resolving mediators, not because they're special, but they have a specialized function to put the brakes on neutrophilic infiltration and stimulate macrophages to clear apoptotic cells, particularly apoptotic neutrophils, those neutrophils that die at the site of battle in inflammation. And this is a very important part of the pro-resolution stimulation of clearance of inflammation. So I know that's a bit of a long answer, but I hope it gives you a picture of how we wandered into the resolution phase. That was a great answer. Thank you. According to ScholarGPS, you've done more research in the field of inflammation than any other scientist. That's pretty remarkable. We'll be talking a lot about SPMs today, but I'd like to back up a little and set the stage and ask you about the research and the work you did that led to the discovery previous to it. I suppose this journey of yours really kind of started when you were in your postdoc years at Karolinska and studying inflammation itself. What intrigues you about inflammation? I mean, we all know it has many, many functions, acute and chronic. But can you talk to us a little bit about what really intrigued you about inflammation and pointed you in that direction? Yeah, Ken, when I was a student, when I first learned about the innate immune response and inflammation, I just felt that this was the key to all of medicine and surgery and that we needed to understand how the body controls the acute inflammatory response, which is protective, control it from preventing collateral tissue damage and more inflammation. Yeah, so in simple terms, we kind of think of inflammation as getting rid of what's damaged, but also protecting what's healthy. And there's different ways that we would discuss inflammation, acute versus chronic. The symptoms kind of for the audience, the symptoms of inflammation would be pain, redness, and swelling typically, like you would get if you got a rug burn, cut your skin, rolled an ankle, something simple. But I've heard you say that inflammation comes in many forms and that we have what you refer to as new villains of inflammation. And since we're talking a little bit about inflammation, can you kind of give us an overview of the different types of inflammation that we might talk about? Sure. I've come to learn that each of the medical specialties thinks about inflammation differently. It means different things to different specialties. An ophthalmologist thinks of inflammation in the eye very differently than a surgeon who is themselves an inflammatory stimulus. From the first cut. Charles, that's great. I just love that. I have a surgeon, the office two doors down from me here at IHMC, and I love that description. I think I'll describe him that way. Well, inflammation has been known since ancient times, the times of Celsius. Ancient physicians described, as you put heat, redness, pain, swelling, and then when Virchow came along, it was the loss of function. So the different forms of inflammation that are common to most clinicians and the general public is acute inflammation, one that occurs rapidly acute, and then chronic inflammation, ongoing persistent inflammation, that one may see in autoimmune diseases, for example, or as we appreciate today, in neurodegenerative diseases. Okay. So in the post-genomic era, my view is that controlling inflammation is the frontier of medicine and surgery because most of the issues that we face in Western societies are the result of excessive inflammation. And that's come to light, I would say, only in the past 10 years or so. With more and more cellular and molecular studies, people arrived at this conclusion that, oh, inflammation is set at hand here. Okay. So in our research, it was important for us to define very carefully what is known as the acute inflammatory response. This is a programmed repertoire of how white blood cells, specifically neutrophils, leave the post-capillary venule and then arrive in tissues, various tissues in the body to defend that tissue. When that process is excessive, when there's an excessive swarming of neutrophils, and neutrophils swarm in and they move, they need chemical signals to smell like sharks moving to red blood cells, they swarm in. When this swarming occurs to protect us from invaders or tissue damage, if it's too much, collateral damage occurs. And that collateral damage propagates inflammation. I think a good example is in rheumatoid arthritis, when neutrophils swarm into the synovium. If they spill these enzymes that have evolved to kill bacteria outside of the cell, if there's incomplete phagocytosis, if that membrane doesn't close and seal from the healthy tissue, the enzymes spill, reactive oxygen species spill, and this destroys the synovium with time and leads to panis formation, which takes this smooth surface and turns it into a stippled surface and it leads to a lot of pain. So, in the textbooks of pathology, it's very clear that the acute inflammatory response had a resolution phase when the area is cleared and the tissues return to homeostasis. That's what we focused on and asking, what's going on in this resolution phase? It's self-limited. It's self-limited. Okay. Let's think about this for a second. Think of having a small pimple on your skin, on the back of your hand. The white of the pimple, the pus, if you will, those are the leukocytes that have swarmed to protect us. And if you leave that pimple alone for a day or two, it completely resolves. So, what's going on there? The body has resolutions, signals to bring us back to homeostasis, and that's what we set our guns at to understand and see if we could learn that process, learn about those molecules. Can we use those molecules to make better and more precise therapeutics, better drugs? So, the villains that you mentioned in today's society, turns out that arachidonic acid, which controls the biosynthesis of prostaglandins and leukotrienes, and it was well appreciated that the prostaglandins play important roles in initiating inflammation. All the signs we mentioned, heat, swelling, pain, these are all mediated by prostaglandins. Well, in the resolution phase, when the leukocytic infiltration reaches a maximum, the resolution program kicks in, and that's where our serendipity comes in. And we found in mouse models that the precursors of the pro-resolving signals, the chemical mediators that orchestrate resolution, come from the omega-3 essential fatty acids. Essential because we do not make EPA or DHA. We need to take these in our diet, in our nutrition, and as you know, these are the major fatty acids that are present in marine oils. And it had been known for quite some time that the marine oils could reduce inflammation, but the mechanisms of how that occurred was argued about in literature and not very clear. So, in a nutshell, what we learned is that the omega-3 fatty acids that we take in our diet, in our daily nutrition, set us up for self-limited resolution. We are challenged every day hundreds and thousands of times. The alarm rings for our defense mechanisms, our white blood cells to come out and protect us in tissue. And that's when we need to turn off that response. And that's where nutrition plays a very important role in enabling us to have self-limited inflammation and return to homeostasis. That's an excellent explanation. I think it really hit all the big points. A key development in your research on inflammation turned out to be a trip to Asia where, unfortunately, you developed a hole in your intestine. Now, that had to be pretty traumatic and does not sound like a fun time. Can you tell us about this incident and its aftermath, which I understand gave you a firsthand experience on why controlling inflammation is important? Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I was returning from Japan and I thought that I had horrible jet lag. But it turned out that I couldn't stand up. And I still made it to the lab that day, but my wife urged me. She said, no, something's wrong. You have to go to the ER. And the bottom line is that I had perfed my bowel and I had peritonitis brewing, which, as you know, is life threatening. And in the ER, some students that were in my classes, I said, don't worry about this. This is, I'm just having a kidney stone. Yeah, it's a lot of pain, but it'll go away. And that was not it at all. I went up for emergency surgery and I had a colostomy. And that taught me that I couldn't waste any time, that we had to understand how the body controlled inflammation. It was a very unpleasant experience for me, but I learned a lot and started to collaborate with a GI pathologist, James Madera, and his group. He was an expert on GI epithelial cells. And we started to do the first experiments on how neutrophils talk to epithelial cells and how that acute inflammatory response can get out of control. And so when I got back to the lab, I said, oh, we have to study peritonitis. So I switched my research program and I primarily an in vitro guy. I like doing experiments in test tubes, but it became painfully evident that I needed to bring in animal models. And so it is then that we started to study animal models of peritonitis and self-limiting peritonitis gave birth to the resolvents. That's fascinating. In other words, how that inflammation in the peritoneum resolved was dictated by the availability of EPA and DHA in the system. And to me, this was a revelation because I didn't think much of the literature at that time around EPA and DHA. But clearly there was an important role for these essential fatty acids in human development. And it became my mission to figure out how they played a role in enabling the biosynthesis of the resolvents and the other specialized pro-resolving mediators, the protectants and the macrophage-derived mediators of resolution that we named the merisins. And I'm happy to report that the merisins, at least MAR1, the first merisin we discovered, is very potent in controlling pain and tissue regeneration. And it is in clinical development. And hopefully that company will be in clinical trials for reducing pain later this year. And Resolven E1 is in clinical trials this year from another company. And I hope that those companies are successful because they will bring the first precision tools to the clinic for controlling inflammation. Now, why is this so important? Well, because our current pharmacopoeia, while adequate in most cases blocking the initiation of inflammation, the thinking was, oh, there's just too many pro-inflammatory molecules, we need to reduce them, actually leads to an unhealthy state of immune suppression. And why is that important? Because as one would be treating rheumatoid arthritis with an agent that would block a cytokine or like TNF-alpha, would open up the system for rampant infection. So that's a really unwanted side effect. You wouldn't want to get TB as a result of taking care of your RA. So we think that pro-resolution pharmacology will pave the way to developing a whole new set of precision tools for clinicians. And it's also opened up an opportunity to think about precision nutrition and how can we get the right amount of EPA and DHA in our children, in our daily diets, so that we are resilient to the many challenges that come to us each day as humans. When you had your issues with the peritonitis, were you taking any anti-inflammatory medications, nonsteroidals? Oh, nonsteroidals, no. I refrained from that. But the main staple treatment prior to surgery was to be on steroids. So steroids also, as good as they are in controlling inflammation, they also lead us to a state of immune suppression. It's all about the timing. And at certain doses, Oliver Wurz's group in Germany showed that steroids like dexamethasone can actually turn on SPM production. So it's a matter of timing, when and how much to use. And that's a very exciting work. With these nonsteroidals, they typically will block, obviously, the production of things like prostaglandins, and so they alleviate pain. But that's basically, you know, that's been the focus within sports medicine community and a lot of the areas where I'm working. But, you know, obviously the complications with those are significant, and I think this is a huge piece to the problem. Can you explain briefly what the anti-inflammatory medications will do to the healing process? Sure. One of the big surprises for us was to find that if we added a nonsteroidal into an acute inflammatory response, either in the peritoneum or in the lung in an animal model, the nonsteroidal, of course, reduces prostaglandins, in some cases down to zero production. But this uncouples resolution. And we need a little bit of prostaglandin E2 to actually trigger the production of the biosynthetic enzymes that are needed to make the pro-resolving mediators. So it's again, it's a situation of temporal analysis and when and where. So when we published those results, they were replicated by many other groups and working in the areas of rheumatoid arthritis and pulmonary inflammation, Dr. Levy's group. But there was one very rapid translation to humans by James Markworth. And at the time, he was working in New Zealand and he's an exercise physiologist. And as you said, in the sports arena, and this is unfortunate in high schools and all of our children have been avid athletes. Somehow they have the notion that if they load up on nonsteroidals before the meet or before the game, before a match, that this is going to help them. In fact, that's not the case at all. It's the most deleterious thing that we can do. We actually consider and to push this point of introduce the notion that nonsteroidal inflammatory drugs, as they're called today, are resolution toxic. And so in James Markworth's study, he studied 60 males before and after strenuous exercise. And he was able to replicate our results from the animal models in humans and showed that the NSAIDs uncoupled resolution. Let me just tell you one exciting thing that's happened from that work that I think is relevant to all those listening who love to play sports. It turns out that the SPMs are made by muscle tissue, not just leukocytes. And that the SPMs stimulate the muscle stem cells. And a group in Canada discovered recently that one of the resolvins, resolvins D2, stimulated the proliferation of muscle cells from the stem cell. And they have reported that thereafter, trying to treat Duchenne's muscular dystrophy with resolvin and resolvin-like agonists. Whoopie! That's exciting! Yeah, and also, when I was up at the conference that you had up at Harvard, they discussed aging in animals and the lack of ability to produce resolution mediators leading to loss of muscle mass as we age. Yeah. Well, thank you, David, for bringing up that point because it enables me to talk about Hildur Arnodot, who was a fellow in my lab from Iceland. She was the first nutritional immunologist to join the group, and she did that study. We looked at the NIH aged mice versus young mice and found that there was a defect in the production of resolution mediators. And I'm happy to make that point because Hilda is an athlete and she was training last year and running and she had a cardiac event. She spent an early morning run and no one was around to help her and unfortunately she passed way too soon. So, that research that she did, yes, is a big loss for us in the field. And she was just a wonderful investigator and a really nice person to work with. Yeah, it's quite a loss. I'm happy that others have taken up the aging issue and other labs are focused in on that research. But we can thank her for starting that work. Indeed. And that's so important as the percentage of the population that's moved into their later years is grown just immensely. That focus, I think, will continue to be very important. Thank you. Thank you for joining us. Thank you for joining us. StemTalk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, nutrition, locomotion, healthspan, resilience, and performance. As we discussed earlier, and we just chatted informally about how uncontrolled inflammation is a very prominent component of many, many, unfortunately, common diseases. We talked about arthritis, and we'll talk in the future, I think, about periodontal disease, but asthma, cancer, diabetes, just a whole slew of them, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, a lot. And so as we think about this and the effect of inflammation on most of the dreaded chronic diseases, you know, one starts to think that there must be many, many therapeutic opportunities for SPMs of various kinds. Can you talk about what seems to be an explosion of research in the field in recent years? It seems to have really garnered much more interest than in the past. Could you talk a little bit about that? Sure. Well, like all science, it was lonely in the beginning. But yesterday on PubMed.gov, just on the Resolvins, there were 1,784 publications. Yeah, that from groups around the world, sure, that constitutes an explosion. But there are two things going on simultaneously. One is increased recognition that uncontrolled inflammation is important in many, many diseases, as you point out. But the other good fortune for us in the resolution field is that several companies have made the Resolvins and the Specialized Pro-Resolving Mediators available for research use. We published the first total organic synthesis of each of the molecules to establish their complete stereochemistry and confirm how they work, but without having commercial sources so that groups in Taiwan and groups in Japan and groups in Australia could purchase the molecules, for example, and all throughout Europe to test in their systems and make new discoveries and teach us how important stimulating resolution is. So one of the points I want to make to you and to your audience is that this is such an exciting system because it's a feed-forward system. We learned that if we give SPMs back in a disease model, not only do they control the inflammation, but they also stimulate endogenous programs to stimulate more production of pro-resolving mediators and reduce inflammation to get to a new homeostasis. You have mentioned kind of of the super families, you have Resolvins, Protectins, and Morecins. Can you kind of give us a little bit of an overview of the differences between those and then maybe the timing that they might show up in a healing response? Sure. The first on the scene, if we're doing a temporal analysis of pus, the initiation begins. The pro-inflammatory mediators, the prostaglandins come into play. The cytokines and chemokines come into play. And you heard about them in the lay press during COVID because that is the cytokine storm that brings the lung down and brings down many individuals during that pandemic. We then shift to production of the lipoxins and they are produced from arachidonic acid, just as the prostaglandins and the leukotrienzone. And then the system begins to use EPA and DHA to make resolvents, protectants. And then late in inflammation, when the pro-resolving macrophages come along, as they were described by Michnikoff back in early 1900s, the big eaters, they eat the dead neutrophils that have lost their lives in the battle against bacteria or in clearing debris. They need to be cleared. So that temporal sequence is what happens in ideal resolution in a laboratory setting. They're each structurally different. So the EPA-derived resolvents come from EPA, which is a carbon-20 structure with five unsaturated double bonds. And we worked out the structures of each of the resolvents of the E-series. And one that we discovered just in the beginning of the pandemic is resolving E4, number four in the panel. And this molecule is important in instructing the macrophages in the spleen to clear old red blood cells. So this is a physiologic mechanism that's not necessarily evoked by an acute inflammatory stimulus. Aha. So there are physiologic roles, not just pathophysiologic roles of the resolvents. The next structures to come along were the protectants. And the protectants are trying, and they are also produced from omega-3 essential fatty acids. But here, the precursor is DHA. And then the D-series resolvents kick in. And the base structure is all DHA. And each molecule of the D-series we carried out the structural elucidation of. And they each activate different receptors. Holy cow. We have receptors for each of the major families. And those receptors stimulate resolution. One of the really exciting things that's come up, while I'm excited about it, is that a company in France has followed our work on resolution. OSE, they made an agonist antibody. An antibody that will activate the resolvin E1 receptor. And they demonstrated that that antibody can help in cancer models, in reducing pain, and reducing inflammation. Now, why is that so exciting, Charlie? Well, the big pushback for me in trying to make mimetics with companies has been the enormous cost of making the scale-up of these, what seem like simple molecules, but they are actually quite difficult to synthesize. In some cases, the steps are 22 steps. So that makes manufacturing of the molecule by total organic synthesis very, very challenging and very costly. Now, I never thought that cost is going to matter when it's going to improve life. But as you know, that's a little naive. And that's what companies live by, is being able to make a profit. So that's why I'm so happy to see agonist antibodies emerge as a way to stimulate resolution. I think it'll change healthcare completely, honestly. Yes, I agree as well. In fact, for our listeners, I think I'd like to mention an article that you did back in 2017 that I particularly liked. It was in the Journal of Molecular Aspects of Medicine. It was sort of like an overall review sort of thing. It was really excellent. And it talked about SPMs marking the dawn of resolution physiology and pharmacology. And it was a really good overview article. We'll provide a link in the show notes to the article for the listeners so they can read it as well. Oh, good. So happy that you liked that. You know, that was really, Ken, a tribute to my colleagues and students and fellows that have worked with me over the years. That was a special issue of the journal Molecular Aspects of Medicine that one of my former fellows, who's a professor in the UK, Dr. Jesmyn Dali, edited the series. And there are articles in there by all our colleagues and former students. But in the review, that it's basically a preface to those chapters in the special issue. And I tried to hit the high points. And as I recall, I discussed in the introduction Claude Bernard, because Claude Bernard was very influential in my learning about biomedical sciences. And he wrote the study of experimental medicine, Introduction to the Study of Experimental Medicine in 1865. Wow. And in that book, he describes that each of the disciplines, the dawn of physiology and pathology and chemistry, each developed as separate disciplines. And he urged us to have interdisciplinary discussions. And that, I'd have to say, is the hallmark of my research, is it's a multidisciplinary approach, chemistry, cell biology, pathology, interacting with different disciplines, internal medicine, surgery, and learning their perspective in oral medicine, periodontal disease, you mentioned. And I learned from them all. And we work together on this common mission, which is our mantra. We repeat in my web meeting every week. Our mission is to help as many people as we can. So I also, in that short article, focused in on the importance of leukocyte traffic and this repertoire of edema, neutrophilic infiltration, and the non-phlogistic recruitment of monocytes and macrophages, which is the acute inflammatory response. Now, people get that confused with acute inflammation. And I think medical school is so jammed with so much to learn that people don't have an opportunity to recall this Chapter 3 in Robinson-Courtran on inflammation. And I urge all the medical students and graduate students and clinicians out there, dust off your Robinson-Courtran and take a look at that chapter. And I was very fortunate to work with Professor Courtran, who's the chair of pathology here. And he was very, very instrumental in my career development. And I have to say that I've been fortunate with mentors, but every academician needs just not one mentor, but half a dozen mentors as we take this journey. I think we too often hear the academic tale of one giant mentor, but we all stand on the shoulders of multiple giants if we're going to be successful. Absolutely. I use the things that you've been teaching every day in my practice and working with teams and athletes and veterans. I mean, this has made such an impact on their lives. I wonder if we can take just a simplistic sort of, for some of our audience that aren't as scientifically minded or their background maybe makes it a little bit confusing, one of the ways that I describe this in terms of how I discuss this with an athlete, the difference between inflammation and resolution. If I am, I'm 5'11", 180 pounds, and I'm in my 50s, I shouldn't be playing any professional sport. But if I, for some reason, get stuck on a pitching mound for a professional baseball team as a joke, it wouldn't take more than one or two pitches to figure out that I'm a mistake. So getting me off the field is sort of what I describe to the athlete as the inflammatory phase. And excessive inflammation would be pulling more than me off the field. Either way you look at it, we're going to lose until you get a replacement. Is that an accurate or somewhat maybe useful way of describing this in terms of the difference between inflammation and resolution and how it affects people? Yeah, I think that's a great analogy because it's important to provide mental images to people that they can relate to. If you're speaking to an athlete, a baseball player, that's very, very appropriate. If you're speaking to a surgeon, I don't think so. Absolutely. It won't go very far. Yeah. No, but surgeon gets it, why we need to control inflammation. And certainly the critical care docs get why we need to understand what's going on in sepsis. One of the other things we introduce is this concept of an immunoresolvent. Rather than a blocking agent, that we would have an agent as a therapeutic that would stimulate the body's own ability to resolve. And we came up with that by doing, in the laboratory, the first quantitative assessments and introduce some very simple calculations in a systems approach to studying how pus resolves. And there was one review that Dr. Mauro Peretti did for children, which I thought was really cute. In the frontiers of immunology, he published Resolution for Kids. And yeah, it's worth looking at. It sounds really interesting. Charles, let's talk about some of your more recent research at the Surhan Laboratory. Can you give us an overview of the research currently underway in the lab? Well, we have ongoing studies detailing the biosynthesis of resolvents, working out the complete stereochemistry of transient intermediates, which is really challenging. And then other studies that are going on in the lab that are addressing how to activate resolution during infection and how to clear infectious inflammation. And then we have ongoing collaborations with Dr. Levy's laboratory, looking at the impact of environmental triggers, environmental agents on the resolution and how they cause inflammation. And one of the very exciting projects we just got funded from NIH is with a cancer researcher, Deepak Panagrahi, at the Beth Israel Hospital. He's a cancer expert looking at how to stimulate resolution of inflammation around solid tumors to reduce the tumor burden. And those are so exciting. Keeps me happy and coming to work every day. So that's roughly what we have going on at this time. And I should say that I'm very, very fortunate to be a grantee of the National Institute of General Medicine, NIGMS, helped us enormously because the base work of resolution and working out the biosynthesis of each of the members of the superfamily of pro-resolving mediators was supported by a program project grant that I led for 10 years that was supported by NIGMS. And I've been supported by NIGMS for my entire career. The other institute that's really been incredibly important is NIDCR in developing this work. And there I served as a principal investigator, program director for a P50 center grant where we used periodontal disease as a demonstration of controlling inflammation. That's about it. Yeah. So last year, you had another article in the Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences that was titled, Resolvent D1 Prevents Injurious Neutrophil Swarming in Transplanted Lungs. And this provided some insights for therapeutically enhancing pro-resolution pathways to minimize early leukocyte-mediated tissue injury and promote healing following transplantation. Can you talk about the progression in that field and how this impacts us? Sure. I really love this study because in the OR, and particularly in transplant, there's a phenomena called reflow injury where a surgeon, when they clamp a vessel to work in an area to repair it, when they open the clamp, the leukocytes that come rushing out in the blood, they have become preemptively activated and they hit that lung and start to cause collateral tissue damage. And the reason why I like this study with Daniel and his group so much is that they have a dual photon microscope and it's possible to visualize what's going on during this reflow injury. So first, in humans, we were able to get from Daniel and his colleagues human graphs and analyze them using LC-MS-MS. And we could follow the temporal production of the prostaglandins, leukotriene, and the resolvents in this primary graft dysfunction. And then going to the animal model where it can do real-time movies, Dr. Lee and his group has made these extraordinary movies using dual photon microscopy of the lung where you can see the neutrophils swarming. I urge everyone to just come and take a look at those movies. They're available on the PNAS website. And what's so convincing and so dramatic is when giving Resolvent D1, it stops the swarm. You can see that it stops the swarming of the leukocytes and prevents collateral tissue damage. And you can visualize all this in that study. And the reason why I like it so much is because this is the primary action of the Resolvents when they are produced to control excessive leukocyte traffic. Does this translate over into areas such as an ischemic stroke or ischemic myocardium after cardiovascular disease event? Absolutely. These cellular molecular events do translate to cardiovascular disease. Organ transplant is a major, major issue where we see all these things happening. But in atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease, these are happening over a long period of time, decades in some cases. The vascular endothelium and surrounding tissues become inflamed. And there's very nice work in the area of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease being done by a number of groups. One is Dr. Gabby Fredman's crew at Albany Medical. He's a former member of my group. And Magnus Beck is a cardiologist at the Karolinska Institute. And he's working in this area and they have published some really elegant studies demonstrating how Resolvents can reduce the sequela of inflammation and atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease. I was very fortunate some years ago, back in 2006 and 2007, to work with Larry Chang, who's an endocrinologist at Baylor. And Larry was able to make a rabbit, a transgenic rabbit that overproduced the enzyme that's responsible for lipoxin and resolvent production. And one of the things we saw is that those rabbits didn't get atherosclerosis and they had a very diminished acute inflammatory response in skin on challenge. They were like super rabbits. Lucky rabbits, I guess. Yeah. And the reason why I mentioned the rabbit is because much of what's known about the pathobiology of atherosclerosis comes from the Watanabe rabbit model where taking high lipid and cholesterol intake leads to an atherosclerotic plaque in those rabbits. And the cool thing is that my colleagues, and I was not involved in this study, when they treated the rabbits, periodontium, that had periodontal inflammation, they did not get any atherosclerosis. Their vessels were clean. It was just amazing. That's Tom Van Dyke's group working with another imaging specialist in the area of lipids at BU, Jim Hamilton. Nice study. So we will put a link in the show notes to Gabriel Fredman's article that you mentioned looking at the evidence that supports SPMs as therapeutic tools for the treatment of arthrosquad and cardiovascular disease sometime in the future. That leads to sort of a follow-up question here. You mentioned rabbits, and that research is very interesting. You know, the natural diet for a rabbit isn't very much like a natural diet for humans, I would assert. But in any case, what I'd really be interested in, are there any clinical trials in the works that you know of that will test whether increasing SPMs in vivo in humans can indeed affect arthrosquad arthrosquad progression? I think that would be really fascinating. Yeah, you're absolutely right, Ken. That is a tall order. That's a very expensive, long type of study to do, but nonetheless, it is extremely important. And Magnus Beck, the cardiologist that I mentioned at Karolinska Institute, he was able to secure a grant from the EU across multiple countries where they are going to be attesting exactly that. And I'm fortunate to be a member of their scientific advisory and watching how the data comes in. And I do believe that they will be successful because these mechanisms are highly conserved across species all the way from fish to human. It's really interesting and very hopeful for the outcome of that study. Charles, you have two children who are currently in the military and your third is potentially on the way into the military. What are your thoughts on the need for the use of SPMs in the military population? That's a very deep question, David. And because I'm emotionally tired to trying to do research that will be helpful in the battlefield and say, well, where did you get that idea from? So, well, I was invited to the San Antonio Battlefield Research Center a few years back to give the Basel Pruitt lecture. And Dr. Pruitt was a trauma surgeon in the military. And on that occasion, I got a chance to see some of the very important work that they're doing at that site and started a collaboration with Dr. Rios on using some of the SPMs in their synthetic form to protect ear damage from acoustic injury. and he has developed a model for blast injury. And what happens in the battlefield is that if a soldier steps on an explosive device the day after, perhaps losing a limb, those soldiers lose sight due to a retinal detachment from the blast shock. And one of the SPMs, Neuroprotectin D1, protects from that in animal models, prevents retinal detachment. And I didn't have an opportunity to tell you, but the neuroprotectins are produced in the retinal pigmented epithelial cells. That's one of the places that make that specific SPM. So I'm hoping that we can get some of those molecules into the battlefield kit. And then the other approach, which I think is so vital, is what many have called nutritional armor to help increase the resilience in the battlefield by specific support of the SPM system? We say, well, how are you going to do that, Charlie? Well, since it's taken more than a lifetime to make mimetics and to launch the idea of precision therapeutics in resolution, resolution pharmacology, one of the really fortunate things we stumbled into is that marine organisms not only make EPA and DHA, they also make resolvins. And they make them in high amounts. So it turns out that when you purchase at the local store your omega-3 fatty acids, most of them come from the Peruvian anchovy. So anchovy is very rich in EPA and DHA. So you want to get anchovies on your pizza. But the cool thing is that they're very rich, the anchovies, in the intermediates, in the biosynthesis of resolvins. So why is that important? Because if you give the intermediate resolvins, they're used at about 100 times more efficacious than EPA and DHA. And then we thought that they were only biosynthetic intermediates. It turns out that they also carry potent biological actions. 17-HDHA, one of the molecules we described, is very potent in regulating pain. And 18E, which is an intermediate E-series biosynthesis of resolvins, is very potent in regulating cardiovascular function. So do you see in austere situations, let's say pilots or other extreme environments, do you see a preventative aspect that may be used from, let's say, taking SPMs over the counter? Yes, David, absolutely. I do hope that this is the direction that having a greater visibility to a larger audience, which you're giving me an opportunity to do today, will dawn on people that this is really preventative medicine and that if we use precision nutrition, we could raise our resilience and, yes, and then to use the therapeutic approaches in more extreme cases. You mentioned the phrase nutritional armor earlier, and Joel Hillman is one of the people that coined that, and I remember he visited here and gave a lecture back in 2014 about nutritional armor, and he was stressing the importance of fish oils and related substances, so I hope he's been tracking your work since then, because I'm sure he would find it really interesting. I know Joe well. He was at NIH and I was on the Board of Scientific Advisors at the institute he worked in, which was NIAAA, and he was a student of Norman Salem, and Norman has done some of the most impactful work in thinking about EPA and DHA in nutrition, and he's demonstrated how important and his team how important DHA is in neural development. Yes, so we know Joe. Sure, Joe is a psychiatrist by training, and he made me aware of the importance of omega-3 in the diet in preventing suicide. Yes, partly due to my interactions with him. At the time, I was on the Defense Science Board, and of course, issues having to do with injury, brain injury, but also suicidality were issues for the board, and in one of the reports, it talks about there should be more focus on nutritional armor and on thinking about DHA and other kinds of approaches, and so it was very hard to get it in the report because Defense Science Board reports are normally dominated by things based in physics or things, or computer science, or not something biological, and so it was an interesting process. What I can tell you is that there have been some very nice studies in TBI, the traumatic brain injury, that was done by, initially, by the research center in Kentucky for TBI, and they showed that in repetitive TBI, a percussive model in animals that the resolvents E1, D1, D2, all protect from TBI, and that's an issue that also crosses over not just from the battlefield but also into sports today. Absolutely. That work stimulated others in the area of Alzheimer's and neuroscientists to look at how the SPMs regulate and protect in neural inflammation, and there we had shown very early on that microglial cells, brain microglial cells, make resolvents, and those cells are like the macrophages of peripheral blood, and they're the ones that are thought to be in an excessive pro-inflammatory state in diseases like Alzheimer's. And just yesterday, I read a paper from the Karolinska group, the neuroscience group, working on Alzheimer's, and how they used MAR-1, one of the SPMs, to protect from advancement of Alzheimer's disease. That's Marianne Schulzberg's group, and they also did a very cool study that came out just about a year and a half ago, where they gave SPMs intranasal in the mouse, and it was in an Alzheimer's mouse, and they found that those mice got their memory back in May's studies. Really impressive, and reduced the neural inflammation. And one other line of research, which I think is very important, that's come up from Japan, about SPMs, is that they may actually be the molecules themselves, endogenous antidepressants. That is interesting. In the sports world, there's a big focus on recovery and healing because of the high number of injuries and nagging chronic musculoskeletal problems. Does it make sense to focus more on resolution in this context, rather than thinking sort of anti-inflammatory in the traditional or old sense of understanding? Yes, David, this is something we need to pound the table about because traditional anti-inflammatory therapies delay wound healing. That's one of the unwanted side effects. But the natural progression of resolution back to homeostasis is tissue regeneration. And we have found that there are additional molecules that are produced during the resolution phase by the SPM pathways that stimulate tissue regeneration. And we found that in a very cool system in planaria. If we cut the planaria in half, this little worm will grow back both halves in like five to seven days. But if we added one of these molecules that we isolated from the resolution phase and determined its structure, we could shorten that regeneration period. So tissue regeneration is part of the resolution cascade, the resolution coda. And a follow-up to that, at your conference I noticed there were several papers discussing sleep and how resolution and sleep kind of interact or what the play is. Do you mind touching on that as well? Sure. The sleep group is over at the BI Deaconess and Monica Hack is the senior there and I just serve as a mentor to the fellow that presented. She showed disrupted sleep study and in disrupted sleep the pro-inflammatory mediators go up in peripheral blood and there's a deficit of SPMs. So I was quite surprised to see that and those analyses were done by the group in Michigan and it really suggests that to get a full sleep cycle one has to overt inflammation. So there I think the SPMs could have a real therapeutic impact in enabling people to skip over, if you will, a disrupted sleep pattern and I think that can have enormous impact in the general public, in the military, and in the sports world as well. Yeah, I see in the professional sports world but also with friends of mine that are either veterans or active duty population, in fact I have a friend that is involved in the human performance space, active duty, and he's in the reserves as well. But one of the things that he told me recently is since he started taking these SPMs, he sleeps better. In his 40s now, he is getting better times on a lot of his physical testing than he was getting when he was in his 20s. So it's having a huge and that's the only change that he's made. And I see that across the board when I'm dealing with athletes, those kind of improvements. It's really outstanding. On a personal note, I've been taking SPMs for a long time. Don't even remember how long, but quite a while. In particular, the ProResolving, I think it's called. ProResolve? Yeah, ProResolve. And the other one is Metagenics Active. SPM Active. Those are the two that I personally take. Well, you'll be happy to know that they are the same pill sold by... Very happy. Actually, I'll tell you a little anecdote there. You know, to sort of jump start that getting it to humans, I gave the Spanish company, Sciutec, that had this... And this is actually an important point for your audience. Okay, so supplements. Do we really need supplements? Well, if you're eating a well-balanced diet, maybe not. So, some supplements are synthetic molecules like vitamin C, B12, etc., and that's definitely needed. In the case of the SPM Active, those are the natural SPMs isolated from Peruvian anchovies. And the Sciutec Corporation had, at that time, around 2012, the world's patent in dominating what's called CO2-based purification. So, there was no organics that would ever touch, no solvents, the molecules. And so, as I mentioned briefly earlier, we found that the Peruvian anchovy had SPMs, and the intermediates SPMs, and I obtained a patent on that, which I gave to the Sciutec group for $1. Why? Because I wanted to see this get to people as fast as possible. And they did that, and I'm so happy they did, and their first customers were Metagenics, and Metagenics has done and is doing a wonderful job making educational material available about the SPMs, and doing nice clinical studies showing that taking the SPM active reduces pain, and having those tools available for people like Dr. LeMay, this opens up even more potential uses, because it's only until you get a tool in a physician's hand until you really know what things are good for. Does that make sense? Absolutely. It certainly does from my perspective. Yeah, totally agree with you. Yeah, so very soon you'll be teaching us what we really need to do with the SPM actives. And I'll tell you a story that makes me, there are two things, you know, you must have heard in what I'm saying that my basis is really in molecular pharmacology, you know, that I love that stuff. So the first is the discovery of the Viagra molecules, okay? this, you know, no one went out to specifically discover something for ED. This was a side effect of a cardiovascular program that Pfizer had to block phosphodiesterases, and it turned out that their molecule blocked the phosphodiesterase that's, that's it, that regulates a cyclic GMP and relieves, I'm trying to figure out a delicate way to say this, erectile dysfunction, ED, okay? And this is a really important problem. The other one, which is really cool, is lotanoprost, which is used, it's a, it's an eyedrop to lower intraocular pressure. It's actually a prostaglandin mimetic, an analog that was developed by AstraZeneca, and when that compound went into use, the side effect noted by the ophthalmologist was that people got extra-long eyelashes. It was a side effect, and the other side effect was to turn brown eyes blue. Oh, wow. So, you can imagine there's a need for both of those, and so businesses has grown up where companies make the compound and put it in cosmetics for people who like to have long eyelashes. So, I'm anticipating that just like we learned, and I didn't anticipate it, I didn't even expect it, that muscle was going to make SPMs. When we found that adipose tissue fat made pro-inflammatory mediators and the SPMs, we were pretty shocked at that. So, I think there's some unexpected things to come up, both in the clinical observations and our continuation of these investigations is going to teach us how to use this information in the best way possible to help as many people as possible. That'd be great. Looping back to the early days of your career, I just want to tie back to that a little bit because STEM Talk has many, many listeners in graduate and medical school, so we get a lot of correspondence from med students and graduate students and physicians as well, but we're really very interested in these young budding scientists and physicians and, you know, they have a lot of passion. I understand there were two books that you read earlier in your career that really had a big impact on you and maybe we should share this with these folks. One was The Art of Scientific Investigation and I understand the other was Men Like Gods. What stood out about these books and would you still recommend them to young investigators and graduate students and medical students today? Yes. Wow. That's a great question. Thank you. So The Art of Scientific Investigation by Beveridge, I still ask people to take a look at it. Beveridge is a professor of pathology at University of Cambridge and this is the only book I know that tries to operationalize preparing to do research and in the first page it says scientific research is not itself a science. It is still an art or a craft and I believe that is very true and he gives some inspiring pearls throughout the book and tells people how to go about preparing yourself to make discoveries. Yeah, I would definitely tell people to go out and get it. It's out of print. I think the last printing of it was in 1957 but you can get almost anything today out there on Amazon so do take a look for it if you're interested in a career in science. The Art of Scientific Investigation. And what about the other book, Men Like Gods? What's that about? Well, okay. That's an H.G. Wells book that he wrote towards the end of his life that really interweaves many of the concepts that he had in his other books like Time Machine and War of the Worlds. And as you can hear, I like sci-fi. I don't have as much time to read it these days. But Men Like Gods was particularly interesting to me at the time because it's about an English newspaper man who's driving on a road, and this is in the late 1920s, and he and several other, I would say, representatives of society at that time were transported to a parallel universe in time and earth 3,000 years, ahead in time. And then, you know, this is a utopian society, and the main character, Bondstable, is really enamored by the whole society, but they become jeopardized by the viruses that the people from our time brought to them, and so they had to be isolated on an island. So it brings up a lot of concepts that, like in War of the Worlds, H.G. Wells, you know, in the end, we don't defeat the invaders, they get defeated by the microbes of Earth. I just like those frame-shift ideas, and I encourage people to read not only science outside of your area of interest, but to get stimulation from other sources, from reading books that you like, and from listening to music, and going out and running, and getting your endorphins up, and smiling every day. The other book that I thought was, and I think is very important, there are two other books. For the medical students, the book that was transformative for me was Arrowsmith. And that's not the rock group, it is Sinclair Lewis's Arrowsmith. Yeah, it's a famous book. Yeah, and it picks up a medical student in his early years, and carries him through the clinical trial, and the forces that come to bear during this epidemic that they face. Yeah, it was Sinclair Lewis's book, and he was the first literature Nobel laureate from the United States, so it's definitely worth reading. And the other book is an obscure book that I found that I just love, and I still copy a page from it and hand it out to members of my group during a lab meeting. And that's Maxwell Maltz, M-A-L-T-Z. He was a plastic surgeon, and he wrote a book of his experiences towards the end of his career that he called Psycho Cybernetics. So what is that, Charlie? Well, this is where you could program. He believed the brain was like a computer. You put in good stuff, you get out good stuff, and you can program yourself to be positive and have a positive impact on those around you. And he learned this apparently by performing plastic surgery on people. He noticed that if someone came to him and said, oh, you know, my ears are too big, you know, can you take off a lobe or so? And after he did that, in 21 days after the surgery, he noticed that there was a personality change. And so he documented that and wrote this book for us. Interesting. Yeah, very. Well, Charles, this has been great fun, and we've enjoyed talking with you very much, and I'm sure our listeners will as well. Absolutely. Thank you for joining us today. Keep up the good work. Yeah, that's for sure. Well, thank you so much, David and Ken, for giving me this opportunity to expose our passions and to tell people about our mission, and I hope that others will take it up. And if you're interested, do write to me. It may take me a little time to get back to you, but I certainly will. Thank you so much, guys. Well, you're quite welcome. It was a fascinating interview, and thank you for your important work. Yeah, thank you very much. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. I'm one of those people we talked about today who finds SPMs to be a revolutionary new field of research. I'm grateful for the work that Charles has done in pioneering the potential of SPMs to promote the natural termination of inflammation. In addition to my performance medicine practice, where I see a wide variety of high-performing patients and athletes and retired and active military members, these patients have inflammation as a result of persistent injuries and trauma. I'm a big fan of SPMs because of the positive impact that they have had on so many of my patients. To me, this discovery is Nobel-worthy information as I believe it will transform healthcare in the near future. I suspect, David, that one reason you are particularly fond of SPMs, among others, is because they allow a person to avoid anti- inflammatory drugs and their numerous side effects. Here at IHMC, we work a lot with military populations who suffer inflammation as a result of persistent injuries. So the potential of SPMs to promote the natural resolution of inflammation is something I am keenly interested in. As Charles has pointed out in the past, anti-inflammation is not equivalent to pro-resolution. Anti-inflammation suggests a blockade of signals in cells, whereas pro-resolution suggests an activation of signals in cells. Quite different. This is David LeMay signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on STEM Talk. Thank you for listening to STEM Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others, so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, STEMtalk.us. There you can also find more information about the guests we interview. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.