 Welcome to STEM Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hello. Today, I'm your host, Dr. Marcus Bauman. Joining me to introduce today's podcast is the man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all the guests who appear on STEM Talk. Hello, Marcus. Great to be here. Today, we have Dr. Anurag Singh, the chief medical officer at Timeline Nutrition, a Swiss life science company that focuses on ways to improve mitochondrial and cellular health. Anurag is particularly known for his research into the gut metabolite urolithin A, which has been shown to improve muscle strength, protect immune systems, and optimize mitochondrial function and efficiency. Anurag is an MD in internal medicine, and he has a PhD in immunology. He's the author of many scholarly papers and has 15 patents. He has led more than 50 randomized clinical trials, many of them focused on urolithin A, over the past decade. In today's episode, we will be talking to Anurag about his investigations into urolithin A and the role it plays in mitochondrial function and health. We also discussed urolithin A on episode 118 with Julie Anderson from the Buck Institute. Before we get to our interview with Anurag, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to STEM Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the wittiest and most lavishly praise-filled reviews to read on STEM Talk. If you hear your review read on STEM Talk, just contact us at stemtalk at ihmc.us to claim your official STEM Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review is short and sweet and was posted by someone who goes by the moniker Jazzy Judah. The review is titled, So Great. The review reads, Keep it up! What a wonderful dissemination of important science. Well, thank you, Jazzy Judah, and thanks to all our other STEM Talk listeners who have helped STEM Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now on to today's interview with Dr. Anurag Singh. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. Well, we're excited for this interview today, and we welcome Dr. Anurag Singh to the podcast. I'm Marcus Bauman, and with me today is Dr. Ken Ford. Hello, Marcus, and hello, Anurag. So you grew up in India, in Lucknow, which is the capital of the most populous state in India. What was your childhood like? So I grew up in a small nuclear family, and, you know, my parents were, I don't know if folks in the audience know, most of India until the 50s and 60s, a lot of people were uneducated. So my parents were actually the first generation to go to college after getting independence from the British. And so there was a big sort of movement to push the next generation to go and do advanced studies. And so I grew up in a very competitive environment where getting a higher education and excelling in education was sort of the prime focus of that generation, my generation that grew up in India. So it was an ultra competitive. I would bike one way 10 kilometers every day just to get to an English school to get my first primary and secondary education. So it was hard, but there was always a very clear focus of, you know, motive of what I needed to achieve. So given that competitive environment, what were you like as a kid? What were some of the things you enjoyed doing when you had time to do things beyond the educational pursuits? So I would say 80% of my time was spent in studies and competitions. I love to write. So that was my calling. I was writing a lot of English essays that would win competitions. I was also a sports inclined kid. I used to play a lot of sports like badminton and basketball. But again, that somehow growing up with a clear focus on education, that kind of got sidetracked. So I would always come the top in class from first grade to all the way to high school. So that was pretty much what defined me. I can see that. We normally ask our guests about when they first became interested in science. And I understand that early on, your parents felt that you had an actual knack for biology, that you had a particular strong point there. And they started encouraging you to think about medical school. Is that right? And how did that work out? Yeah, that's pretty much, you know, nobody in my family or even the extended family had ever gone to med school. And being a doctor and going to med school was sort of the ultimate prize in education. And I was very good. I was very good in biology. I would always top, you know, the pre-biology school exams. And so, yeah, it's just kind of, you know, from there you go and you write a competitive exams that allow you to get into medical school. And about a million kids of between 17 to 21 years of age write this exam and only 100 get selected. So that's how I got into, I had an act for biology. Wow, that's a pretty tight filter. From what I've heard from reliable sources, perhaps a little birdie, that you started medical school at only 18 years of age. Is that right? That's correct. So in India, if you crack this particular national level exam, and that's open for kids from straight out of high school all the way to, you know, who were graduating college. If you crack the exam early on, you can get into medical school as early as 18. So, you know, at that time, I thought I was very fortunate enough. In hindsight, I think maybe a few more years of experience, you know, at that stage would have been a bit more maturity would help. But yeah, I was in medical school at 18. So this took you to India's Armed Forces Medical College for training in internal medicine. We understand that's one of the top medical schools in India. Is that right? It is. So it's routinely ranked in the top three medical schools in India. One is the All Institute of Medical Sciences, which is based in Delhi. The second is always the Armed Forces Medical College. And there's a very healthy rivalry between these top three medical schools. So I got into AFMC at 18. And the whole idea behind the institute is like what would be the equivalent of your Walter Reed or other medical institutes that are catering to training doctors for the armed forces. For any graduate of the Armed Forces Medical College, I understand it's typical for a young doctor to serve a few years in the Indian Army. But we understand that you have an interesting story about how you ended up in the U.S. rather than serving in the Indian Army. Sure. So in India, it's about five and a half to six years of medical school. And so when you graduate, you either get commissioned into the Indian Armed Forces as a medical doctor. The prerequisite is that you need to clear a medical exam before. And I was flat-footed. And that kind of stopped me from doing so. I was asked to not be in the Army because I was flat-footed. And I was also more interested in doing medical research, which was the society that I was leading in my med school. And so my interest in research led me to U.S. So is that sort of how you decided to pursue a Ph.D. in immunology? It seems like one might have led to the other. Yeah. I practiced, actually, for a few years after graduating. I went to practice in a lot of public hospitals, really where medicine in India at that time still is an emerging country. Medical care is not always available in the remotest part of the nation. So I was doing that. And during that time, I felt as if I was just blindly treating the symptomatology of these chronic, I see a lot of cancer patients, a lot of diabetics. And that often triggered the question, what if we could intervene early? What would be needed? And I felt the environment wasn't really there to ask those kind of questions. And after a few years of practice, I started applying into research programs and almost got into almost all of them in the U.S. So what was your Ph.D. research about? So I went to graduate school in the University of Connecticut. The med school is based in Farmington, Connecticut. And my Ph.D. was actually studying immune responses and particularly immune responses that happen in a lot of emerging food allergies and things like chronic asthma. I was trained by amazing professors who gave me the, let's say, the scope to define. They saw that, you know, I was a young clinician who was asking the right questions. And so, yeah, my Ph.D. was actually discovering a unique immune cell that could actually stop asthma. That's really interesting. So with that background for your research training and medical training as an internist, you accepted a position in 2009 with the Swiss-based company, Nestle. It was at a time when the company was getting into the space between food and pharma. How did this move come about for you? Yes, I think there's a transition in between. So in the laboratory I was, there was a lot of other fellows training. And one of them actually was a naturopathic doctor who was in a similar, you know, K Award fellowship from, at the time, I think, from the National Institute of Health. And he was studying natural compounds, but he didn't have the expertise to look at immune cells, etc. So when I started studying these natural compounds, and he was looking at natural compounds coming from the stem of pineapples, actually. A lot of them are, one of them is called bromelain. And that had these amazing therapeutic properties against asthma. And so that got my interest, and that led to a lot of publications. And Nestle was, at that time, as you mentioned, getting into this space between food and pharma, medical foods and consumer health supplements, etc. And they were very interested in finding other new ways of natural ways of tackling food allergies, because they are big in the infant formula space. And so they also were looking for not pure PhDs, but physician scientists who knew how to run the gamut of clinical studies and to translate them into human settings with research questions. And so, yeah, in 2009, they hired me. I was one of the, not the first, actually, only the second MD in a 300,000-employee company and did some fantastic work there. Sounds really interesting. And I can see how it fit with your background rather perfectly. You quickly became medical director at Nestle and started initiating clinical trials as we were discussing around food and respiratory allergies. And I think these trials were conducted literally all over the world. And you also started doing research on aging and how the immune system declines with age. Can you talk about your key takeaways from your time at Nestle? Yeah. You know, I think the two takeaways, probably. One was it takes time to find, let's say, new, innovative, natural ways to modulate the immune system or the human body in general. And how long it takes to, from discovering, at that time, we were studying a lot of probiotics and prebiotics that could modulate the gut microbiome and food allergy kids. And so my interest kind of started from there. And then Nestle got into, as you mentioned, they started a substantiary called Nestle Health Science. And their products were all kind of fitting more into high-protein supplementation, et cetera, for the aging population. And so I started looking at the immune system of these old folks. My takeaway were basically how long it takes to innovate in the field and how less of a science was being actually happening in the nutrition field, where people were just blending vitamins and minerals without really knowing how there's interaction between different nutrients, throwing them into supplements and mostly marketing-driven. And so that led me to where I am. So it's an interesting course, you know, from a practicing physician to becoming a research scientist. I understand you had a mentor in the U.S. who gave you some advice that led to that decision for you to sort of make that switch in your trajectory. Can you tell us about that? Yeah, it was, gosh, about 20-plus years back. You know, I was in that phase where I wanted to keep a little bit of my clinical skills, see patients for a day or two, and then do research. And then, as I said, I've always been lucky and blessed with the great mentors. And particularly one professor who was trained MD from Stanford and had discovered anti-TNF in the 80s, he trained me all the way and he told me, all right, if you really want to make it in research, you need to devote yourself. And it's not one day a week you can do research. So, you know, I took that to heart and I took him as my role model. And I've been fully focused in clinical and translational research since then. That's good advice he gave you. In 2014, you joined the Swiss-based company Amazentes as chief medical officer and you became the lead for their medical and clinical research strategies. Can you talk about the company and the work you do? Sure. So, you know, all these years at Nestle, I had never imagined leaving and becoming sort of joining forces with entrepreneurs. And so I was introduced actually to the founders of Amazentes, who were mostly professors who were based out of the Swiss Institute of Technology. And they had this ideology behind Amazentes that they would bring the biotech approach to nutrition. And by that, I mean really deep science-driven approach to discovering new natural compounds. And the second thing they told me, we have patient capital, so we have raised money. And we are where the investors are very patient and they're going to give us this amount of time to go and discover new natural compounds and take them to humans. And so I felt that that spoke to me, the entrepreneurial nature of these founding scientists and the patient capital perspective. For our listeners, would you describe the relationship between Amazentes and Timeline? Sometimes it gets a little confusing. Sure. So Amazentes is a parent Swiss company, the research company. Amazentes was always founded with the ideology to sort of create the genentech of the nutrition space. So, you know, bring in the deep biology, science-driven approach to discovering new natural compounds. And 10, 12 years after doing really the hard yards of research, Amazentes founded the Timeline brand, which is how the commercial products are sold under. So Timeline is sort of the U.S. brand and this U.S. entity. And Amazentes is the parent research arm based out of Switzerland. So you touched a bit on sort of this biotech approach to nutrition. Maybe for our listeners who don't, you know, have a good understanding of how that would transpire. Can you talk about that a little bit deeper? How you all use sort of hard biology in your nutritional approaches? Yeah. So the biotech approach is you take a deep dive into, let's say, commonly described health benefit promoting foods and fruits and nuts, for example. At that time, we were looking into, this is 10 plus years back, we started looking into the pomegranates. We started looking into berries. Now, the original idea was you need the composite. Every bioactive and there are hundreds of these beneficial compounds inside pomegranate that you need to blend. And so when we started studying and there were already hundreds of, let's say, clinical studies and publication on why pomegranate was a superfood. When you actually looked at the ensemble of the data, there was always mixed. There were trials that had some promise and there would be trials that showed really nothing. And so we drilled down, you know, we really started deconstructing the pomegranate and we found hundreds of compounds inside the pomegranate, which would even be different whether you source pomegranates from Israel or pomegranates from Spain or pomegranates from Azerbaijan. And so that led us to really starting to study how the gut microbiome was absorbing all these different bioactives and drilling down to really the key active that was responsible for a lot of those health promoting effects. And that led to where we are. So the biotech approach essentially is today we are all taking vitamin C. We really don't know what we know. There are sources like oranges and citrus foods that are rich in vitamin C. And we have some idea that it has these immune boosting effects. But how does it work? Where does it get absorbed? Nobody really knows. The biotech approach equivalent is, you know, the active compound, you know, it's plasma levels that are needed to get a health benefit. You know how to boost it and you know the target and the mechanism of action of how the compound works. And then you can, you know, translate it in different clinical settings. So that's the biotech approach, much like how it would be in the pharmaceutical space. Makes a lot of sense. And frankly, much needed in the field. So kudos to you all. We've heard you say that timeline is trying to be a disruptor in the field of longevity by acting on mitochondrial health. Before we dive into this, could you first give our listeners a short primer on the role and importance of mitochondria? Yeah, sure. Absolutely. So mitochondria are, and your audience may have heard from school textbooks, they are the powerhouse of the cell. But they're really like the batteries that keep your, you know, if you think about your Tesla car or any car, they're the batteries of the car. And you need them to function. You need them to get up from a chair. You need them, the energy that these organelles are producing to move around, to think clearly. So without mitochondria, we wouldn't exist. So, you know, mitochondria, think of them as energy factories. And what happens with aging is that these energy factories get compromised. And this declining mitochondrial health is actually a key hallmark of aging. And there are other hallmarks for aging, but I think one of the most amenable to intervention to improve health span in the aging spectrum, I think improving mitochondrial health, which is basically, you know, getting more energy so you have a little bit more left in the tank at the end of the day, is probably the most realistic. So if a person is in good mitochondrial health, presumably, as you mentioned, they would have a good consistent supply of energy, which is, of course, beneficial. Are there other benefits of good mitochondrial health? Yeah, absolutely. I mean, mitochondria are found in every cell type. The highest abundance of mitochondria is in organs that are very metabolic, right? So the skeletal muscle is one of the most metabolic organs. So there are thousands of mitochondria in every skeletal muscle cell. The brain cells also, again, have a very high metabolic demand, and they need a lot of energy in mitochondria to keep your cognition, cognitive abilities. The heart, the kidney, you know, other than the red blood cell, mitochondria are probably essential to the function of every human cell type. And so what happens with aging is there's a gradual decline in mitochondrial function. And that's what you feel at a whole body level. You feel declining levels of energy show up as fatigue, as not being able to think clearly or not sleep properly. Absolutely. And unfortunately, one sees that often among friends and colleagues as we go through the process of living longer. This might also be a good time to explain some terms, mitochondrial biogenesis and also metophagy. Sure. So the example I often give for biogenesis versus mitophagy. So today in the whole mitochondrial health field, there are three categories of how you can boost mitochondrial health. One is biogenesis, which means generating newer healthy mitochondria. So the idea is that instead of 1,000, if you had 2,000 mitochondria, you would have more energy. And that's the concept of biogenesis. The second, let's say, block of how you could improve mitochondrial health is by improving the efficiency of whatever you have. So if you have 1,000 in mitochondria per cell type, if you could make 500 more efficient, you would get more energy per mitochondria. And there are nutrients that do that. The one area where there had never really been a nutrient described before that could improve mitochondrial health is through this pathway of mitophagy. So in the life cycle of a mitochondria, there's always a balance between healthy mitochondria and faulty mitochondria. And with aging, the balance shifts towards more faulty mitochondria. And you need this process that always is in the background on a sort of auto loop running. That's called mitophagy, which really means clearing away faulty mitochondria. And this process slows down. It's similar to autophagy, okay? Autophagy is more at a whole cellular level and mitophagy is autophagy specific to the mitochondria. And so when this process slows down, you just get more accumulation of faulty mitochondria. And think of it like your trash bin in your house. If it fills up and there's no more room to put more trash, your house will not smell well. And that's exactly what's happening at a cellular level. You made mention of the term health span. So just wanted to revisit that for a second. I think it's important to point out that what you've been describing speaks to health span more so than lifespan. And if I'm hearing you right, the goal of timeline is to increase the number of years that a person can enjoy optimal health. This is also consistent with our philosophy here at IHMC. I want to talk a little bit about frailty, which is caused by weakening of skeletal muscle and a whole host of other things that accompany this sort of frailty syndrome. It's a serious issue as we age. It can lead to falls, broken bones, particularly broken hips. The elderly quite often never recover fully from a fall that lands them in the hospital. So maintaining strength as we age is critical. This might be a good time to talk about your study that you conducted on individuals in the Dutch study. The Dutch are well known for their physical activity. And in this study, you compared very active seniors with sedentary couch potatoes. Can you talk about the origins of the study and what you found? Yeah, sure. So when we started, and this goes back to 10 plus years back, we knew the compounds that we were discovering were hitting mitochondria. And as we moved to human translation, we wanted to explore which would be the most relevant starting populations to really trial and do first human clinical studies. And aging is a big stressor on mitochondrial health. This was well known. What we wanted to do was confirm those findings. And second, really have a firm grasp of tools available in clinical trials that we could implement to see the effects of a lot of these actors we were discovering. And so we went a little bit naively to a research institute in Leiden in the Netherlands. And we started their recruiting for a 70 plus population. On one side, we had these extremely fit older adults, 70 to 75 years of age, who were training for half marathons. And on the other, we compared them to 70, 75 year olds who were very sedentary, pretty much on the path to frailty, as you described. And they had various levels of declining muscle strength. It was really shocking as we looked through different batteries of tools in the clinic. The number one criteria, we took muscle biopsies. We put these folks into exercise testing and magnetic resonance scanning. This is a technique called magnetic resonance spectroscopy that allows you to study mitochondrial health in real time. And the answer was always mitochondria. These frail older adults had very poor mitochondrial health in their skeletal muscles, whether you looked through molecular ways and, you know, taking biopsies and looking for genomic or protein markers of mitochondria or, you know, non-invasively through exercise depletion of energy reserves. So the older adults who were very fit, very athletic, had the mitochondrial health of very much, you know, 30, 40 year old person. Well, wow, that's really interesting. And you can sort of see that just anecdotally, you know, in one's life when you see seniors that are just very active. They seem to have a lot of energy. And in the past, one has always wondered, is this a selection issue? In other words, the highly energetic do energetic things. And what you're demonstrating, in a sense, is that that's not the case, that mitochondrial impairment is actually a hallmark of pre-frailty development. So the arrow of directionality is more clear here. And I think it's a really interesting study. And in general, exercise is incredibly important. Marcus leads our HealthSpan Resilience and Performance research focus area here at IHMC. And he likes to talk about exercise as medicine, that if you could write a prescription for exercise and it was as easy as taking a pill, it would be heavily prescribed. Can you talk on the importance of exercise in general? Sure. I mean, I couldn't have phrased it better. I mean, exercise is a miracle drug. And as a physician, if I could prescribe it to most of the aging population, I wouldn't. The days I practiced, I was. Even to diabetics, you would see the effects of just moving a bit more or doing 20, 30 minutes. And I've done enough trials with high protein and exercise to know how exercise actually works through boosting mitochondrial health. Problem with exercise is the compliance in different populations, whether it's older adults or those with chronic conditions that impact muscle and mobility. So, yeah, different forms of any form of exercise is the number one recommendation. I 200% agree with what you said, Marcus said. You know, it's interesting, too, because as there have been attempts to drug exercise or come up with an exercise memetic, what seems to always be missing is the thousands upon thousands of signaling cascades that you'll never recapitulate with a pill. You may be able to target one of them or two of them, but the idea of ever recapitulating the benefits, it's just sort of hard to imagine. But that's great to hear your take on that. As you just talked about, these 70-year-old triathletes versus sedentary individuals, the 70-year-olds having mitochondrial health of, you know, folks 30, 40 years younger, it's pretty amazing. In recent years, we've seen an explosion of research and interest in healthspan resilience as well as lifespan. Can you talk about some of the key tenets of healthy aging from your perspective? Yeah, you know, I always say to me there are sort of three or let's say three to five pillars of healthy aging. One is definitely exercise, physical activity. Second is the diet, right? So if you're eating well-balanced, like this intermittent fasting or calorie restriction, not that you need to starve yourself, but, you know, if you're watching what you eat and you're getting enough fiber and enough protein in your diet that is helping your muscle quality, then those two are the big pillars. And then oftentimes, and I see that even, I'm in my mid-40s, I see that I want to exercise, but, you know, just a whole professional day with kids, at the end, somehow you become confined to being a weekend warrior kind of a person doing exercise only in the weekends. And that's where I feel advanced nutrition. And that's where I feel a lot of the work we have been doing helps sort of just give it a little bit more push and maintenance to your other things you're doing. And the other two that I particularly think impact healthy aging and mitochondrial health, the fourth one is the sleep. Just having a good sleep and how that impacts your mitochondrial health and overall biology and keeping the different hallmarks phaging away is what we will see is probably a lot of new science coming in that direction. And the fifth is just, you know, stress and having your loved ones around you and keeping your stress levels low. So those probably are my five mantras for healthy aging. Looping back briefly to the Dutch study and our discussion about exercise as medicine and how, you know, compliance is difficult. Imagine if instead of making your mitochondria similar to the mitochondria in a person 30 years younger, if it were your skin, everyone would be exercising or your hair. I think a lot of it is because people don't physically see it when they look in the mirror and they're not thinking of their mitochondria. But exercise is absolutely critical. And following up on that, IHMC recently opened our new Healthspan Resilience and Performance Research Complex. And Marcus, we get a lot of questions about this from our listeners because they've been following it. Could you take just a brief aside and tell the listeners about the capacity and capabilities of the new research complex and what it's focused on? Sure. Now, this is very exciting for IHMC and for the region here in northwest Florida. Our complex was designed carefully so that we could do much of what we've just talked about in terms of understanding the mechanisms by which we all can improve healthspan resilience or performance, whether that be cognitive performance, physical performance. Or what I always like to think of as well is performance at the individual cell level or the organ level. So we want to ultimately improve resilience and performance of the individual at the whole body level. But in order to do that, sometimes there's great opportunity to target and study much smaller puzzle pieces, so to speak. So we've designed a building to enable us to do that. And I think you'd be particularly interested. One of the key laboratories in the building is a mitochondrial energetics core. So we can do a whole genome sequencing. We can do whole proteome analyses, epigenomic analyses, and then mitochondrial health and stem cell biology studies, along with the analyses of the whole human. So we're very excited about this complex. We have a large-scale intervention core in the building as well for clinical trials and a clinical research unit, which enables us to, you know, screen individuals, test them, collect biospecimens from them, blood, muscle, adipose tissue, urine samples, things that we can use and leverage to understand the impact of various interventions. So it's an exciting time for IHMC. It is, Marcus. You know, we've already discussed some of the consequences of poor metabolic health and that it leaves people vulnerable to many disorders, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease and a host of other issues. And although it is well appreciated that metabolic health is important, I think it was the University of North Carolina recently released, or a couple years ago, a study that found only 12% of the U.S. population are metabolically healthy. And this is not limited to the U.S. If you travel and look around, you can see it. Declining metabolic health seems to be a global issue. And I just wondered, Anraag, if you could talk about that a little. Yeah. I mean, this is at the heart of metabolic health, and you're seeing that in the developed world. Actually, a lot of the research we stumbled upon was how metabolic health was being shaped by the gut microbiome and how the gut microbiome has evolved across different parts of the world, depending on the diet people have been taking. And so we went to U.S. and Canada. We looked at folks if they were making these healthy sort of gut metabolites after taking different nutrients. We saw, actually, you said 12%. That's pretty much the 12% we saw that had a healthy gut microbiome. So now, as I was hearing you, I was wondering if, you know, those with the healthy gut microbiome are the ones with the healthy metabolic health. Irrespective of that, I think we are in a crisis. And all these new drugs that you hear about, these lifestyle drugs, are trending, targeting GLP-1 and trying to contract. But I see that as a very short-circuit answer to the crisis. But certainly, tackling mitochondrial health is key to improving metabolic health. So glad we talked about that. Let's jump back into your work at Timeline, where you're investigating natural compounds that target mitochondrial health. And during some of your work, you found that the molecule urolithin A outshone every other molecule you were studying. Urolithin A is a natural compound produced by gut bacteria from ingested elagitannins and elagic acid, complex polyphenols found in foods such as pomegranate, berries, and nuts. Can you give listeners a short overview of the importance and role of these elagitannins? Sure. Yeah. So, elagitannins are basically complex polyphenols. And most fruits and nuts have a lot of these polyphenols and things like quercetin. And elagitannins are found enriched in pomegranates, red berries, and blackberries, and to a certain extent, in walnuts and pecans. And so they're abundant. And we're all getting exposed to it if you're eating the right fruits and nuts and diet. And the elagitannins, just to finish the loop, are in when you peel a pomegranate. They're not in those shiny red arils. They're actually in those white part of the layering that keeps the aril inside the pomegranate. And most people throw the white part away. So there goes all the elagitannins. But what we found was that a lot of these elagitannins get metabolized by the gut microbiome into smaller, simpler phenol metabolites. They get digested and get released as postbiotics. So that's how we stumble upon a lot of our discovery. It's really, really interesting. You know, just from a public health standpoint, people are unaware, right, of the components of, for example, a pomegranate that they should not toss away. So that message needs to get out. It's really interesting. You know, I've heard some of the same things about the peels and various components of other products, whether it be watermelon, oranges, and so forth. So I think we probably, as a public health outreach, should do a better job of explaining some of that. So given the importance of the microbiota in this process you just talked about, are there lifestyle behaviors that can improve your gut microbiome population to increase how much urolithin A you can pull from food sources? So urolithin A is not found commonly in foods. It is mostly released in the circulation post the metabolism of these elagitannins by the gut microbiome. Now, you can reshape your microbiome to a certain extent by eating a healthy diet. So for folks, I mean, we've done studies all around the world in looking into who's making urolithin A and who's not making urolithin A. And what we see is that the people who make urolithin A actually are eating the most healthiest diet rich in fruits and nuts, A. B, they're eating a lot of fiber. C, when we look at their gut microbiome and we sequence it, it's clear that their gut microbiome is very rich and diverse. And so just the answer lies in eating the right healthy diet that has probably a good portion of fermented foods and fiber. Myself, I'll give you my example. So I grew up in India, took a lot of antibiotics, which is pretty much the norm. The moment you sneeze, a doctor in India will give you an antibiotic and it uses rampant. And so I think if your microbiome is kind of conditioned in the first years of development, then at least my experience has been that even if I try to eat a lot of healthy diet rich in fiber and fermented foods, it's very difficult even today. I can drink six glasses of juice. My body just refuses to make urolithin A. Following up on our previous question, assuming now the hypothetical perfect gut microbiome and the perfect collegiotin in conversion, is it possible to generate enough urolithin A through the diet alone to observe any considerable benefit? So I would say out of the 1,200 plus participants I've looked across multitude of clinical trials, I would say there is about 10 to 12 percent who have that magic threshold, meaning they are following a healthy lifestyle, they're eating the right diet, and they have the right gut microbiome. Now we have actually, we did a study a few years back where we gave about 100 individuals in the U.S. metropolis, it was actually downtown Chicago, we took middle-aged adults and we gave them a glass of concentrated pure pomegranate juice, which theoretically had all the peel and the alleged tannins in it. You could boost the number from 12 to 40 percent, but there were still the 60 percent who even were exposed to the perfect diet where you didn't see any urolithin A being produced. So the answer is probably yes, to a certain extent. And we have studied, this is 10 percent, as I call them, the blessed people because they have the best of everything. They have the urolithin A levels that probably even the highest dosing of direct dietary supplementation can achieve. And it's interesting, there's a study from a Spanish group that studied these folks who make urolithin A who are a bit overweight. Urolithin A protects them, gives them like cardiometabolic protection, and that was, I found, very interesting. So yes, there are benefits that you can derive, and there are people who get enough from the diet. So we want to talk about a study, a paper you published in 2016. Just briefly, as an aside before that, I'm curious, you mentioned antibiotics as one means of sort of disrupting the microbiome and therefore impacting your ability to release urolithin A. Are there other particular impactors on the microbiome, dietary or otherwise, that you all have identified that impact that 60 percent or upwards of 80 plus percent of folks? I would say lifestyle choices, being sedentary also, being your physical activity levels impacted. I would turn the answer a bit differently. What we find very unique is that the same 10 to 20 percent that have the ability to make urolithin A also have the right, let's say, environment to produce a lot of other health-promoting postbiotics, right? So their bacteria are making short-chain fatty acids. They're making other maybe characterized or uncharacterized molecules that have these immense human health benefits. So your question was, is there hope for the remaining 60 percent? And I guess antibiotic use should be discouraged unless it's really needed. I think people, there are studies where taking the right probiotics along with the right fiber has boosted a lot of these postbiotic levels. And the answer is not in a single probiotic. It's really a whole blend of kind of ecosystem that you need to conceive in a pill, which, again, is a difficult task. But, yeah, we're getting there as a sort of science movement on the gut microbiome. Oh, that's great. STEM Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, locomotion, healthspan, resilience, and performance. So the 2016 paper, which really was your first glimpse, at least from what we can tell, into the potential of urolithin A. The study was entitled, Urolithin A induces mitophagy and prolongs lifespan and C. elegans and increases muscle function in rodents. Can you please talk about the origins of this and the results? Yeah, sure. So this is really the first landmark publication which stems from, let's say, the first six to eight years of our research efforts. Most of our research back then and even today is done in partnership with leading professors around the world. And so we are actually based out of the Swiss Institute of Technology here in Lausanne, which is like the MIT of Europe. And we have access to one of the smartest professors who study mitochondria and aging and longevity pathways. And so we were working with Professor Johan Overig, who's very well known in the field for his research over the last 30 plus years on metabolic and mitochondrial role in human health. And he has been instrumental in the discovery of many other natural compounds like NAD modulators and resveratrol. And so most of his research that we were collaborating starts in nematodes in C. elegans, which is a worm that lives about 20 days. And so you can take libraries of natural compounds and put them in these microfluidic devices that have these nematodes. And you can see which one is going to have, you know, which one is going to boost their lifespan and healthspan, meaning these worms become more mobile, they eat better, and they just live longer. And so when we were looking at these many actives inside the palm granite, we also put in these byproducts, these urolithins that had mostly been described as waste products. And we didn't tell him, of course, we blinded his lab. And he came actually running across the road. They're just based across the road from us in the Innovation Park. And he said, what is this molecule? Because it's caloric restriction is always the control and it boosts lifespan in these worms by about 50%. And closest one we know molecule that does about 35, 40 is metformin. This molecule is doing about 45% of lifespan extension and the worms are moving like as if the young worms would move. And so that was the Eureka moment. And we had also given them the alleged tannins in these experiments and they were not doing anything in these assays. So we zeroed in on these urolithins. We started looking at it. And there's actually multiple urolithins. There's urolithin A, B, C, and D, all the way to EFG, I think. Urolithin A is the most circulating urolithin. So when we studied all the urolithins, urolithin A had the best effect. And so that's how this is the summary of that work. From there, we gave it to older animal models of aging rodents that started running 40% longer. And they had more muscle strength, about 10% more muscle strength. And we zeroed in that the effect was because of the mitophagy impact on the muscle mitochondria. So that's the nature medicine. When the professor was doing the scan, you mentioned metformin and other things that you looked at. Did you look at rapamycin? We did. And rapamycin is also well known to induce longevity. I think it does it about 25%, 30% in those assays. NAD modulators are there. Respiratrol does it by 15% as well. And these all, like in the case of rapamycin, a very different mechanism of action. So it's kind of interesting. Yeah, so again, back, I think Marcus mentioned that there is no one magic bullet, right? There are all these different pathways that probably something like exercise hits. But one molecule probably can, probably mitophagy is a key process that you need to reawaken during the aging process. But yeah, rapamycin goes through a different one called mTOR. As we've been discussing just now, urolith NA has been well demonstrated at this point to activate mitophagy. I wonder, is the underlying mechanism of action known in detail? Or is it really a case of a strong association with the key regulators of autophagy and mitophagy like MPK and mTOR? So we know it doesn't go through mTOR. We know it goes through AMPK and phospho-AMPK. But is that a downstream signaling cascade? Or the short answer is we haven't figured it out, but we are close to figuring out the target of urolith NA. Good, yeah. I wasn't suggesting that it would go through mTOR. I was trying to give an example of an association versus understanding the mechanism in depth. Yeah, so it's, you know, the pathways that we think probably are the closest are probably all the oxidative stress pathways that link up to a lot of these polyphenols that have been well described to activate actually. Makes sense. As we've discussed with regard to some of the work in aging as well as the sedentary lifestyle, there's a progressive decline in the cell's capacity to eliminate its dysfunctional elements by autophagy and in the case of mitochondrial mitophagy. This decrease in the autophagy and recycling of dysfunctional mitochondria and skeletal muscle has been closely linked to poor muscle health and quality in older adults. In 2019, you had a paper that published the results of your first human clinical trial, in which you administered either a single dose or multiple doses of urolith NA to sedentary adults but otherwise healthy, since that's one biomarker of health. The results of this trial were quite impressive. Were you surprised? And could you talk about those results? Yeah, sure. Absolutely. So, you know, again, this is bringing sort of the biotech approach to nutrition. Most strategies would go blend urolith NA and start selling or run a small-scale study. We wanted to actually characterize first the safety and the pharmacokinetics, meaning the exposure. So what is the minimal efficacious dose of urolith NA? And we knew we had done this Dutch study, which we talked before, where we knew sedentary older adults had some kind of compromised mitochondrial health in the skeletal muscle. So we went, we started with a cohort of older adults, which we gave a dose of 250 milligrams of urolith NA, which translated from the dose that we were seeing effects in different other models of aging. And then we kept, once we showed safety and biovailability, we kept increasing it up till two grams. Now, at about a gram, from 250, 500 to a gram, we saw linear increase in exposure. So more urolith NA showing up in the plasma of these older adults. After a gram, we sort of saturated the system, meaning it's just not a, you know, every time you double the dose from one to two gram or four gram. So we started, we focused very quickly in the 500 and the gram dose of urolith NA. And we took muscle biopsies after a longer intervention of four weeks. And we basically compared them to a placebo group, which was similar to the 70 plus sedentary group that I described before had poor mitochondrial health in their muscles. And when we saw what shocked us in all the collaborators at the time was how very nicely we were able to see in a dose response manner. A lot of these mitochondrial genes come back to life. So sort of from being downregulated in the muscle to very highly upregulated in a very linear fashion. And then at the plasma level, the sort of markers we were seeing, and this is where you do a sort of a whole metabolomics approach, looking at thousands of circulating metabolites. The key metabolites that we were picking up were mostly linked to mitochondrial health and fatty acid oxidation pathway, suggesting that overall mitochondrial health in these individuals was improving. So again, for your audience, most of these markers we look in the biopsies are linked to either biogenesis, so typical marker there's PGC1-alpha, or mitophagy and the typical marker we look at, or set of markers we look at, are linked to markers such as Parkinson's. So that's how we know mitophagy and biogenesis was happening. So that in a nutshell is the first translational findings in humans. It's very cool. Looping back for just a second, we also know exercise activates mitophagy, certainly improves mitochondrial function, and induces mitochondrial biogenesis. What are the key cellular differences or mechanistic differences between exercise and urolithin A? Are you aware of any in terms of the mechanism of action? If I had to compare, I would say urolithin A is like almost an exercise mimetic in terms that it's hitting the same mitochondrial pathways. Exercise may have more effects on fuel utilization and body composition that we don't immediately see in, let's say, a month-long or changes in, let's say, muscle mass that we see. For example, mostly we see the improvement is in muscle quality. The other consistent finding across the randomized trials we see is a dampening of sort of the chronic inflammation that accompanies aging. So those are the similarities and sort of the similarities. But on the mitochondria, with respect to mitophagy and biogenesis, it probably, I mean, the first time you started showing in different conferences this data, a lot of people were asking if this was an exercise mimetic. And I still think it is like an exercise mimetic. Your research that you've just been discussing on urolithin A led to the development of MitoPure, the first postbiotic nutrient that's been shown to trigger mitophagy by targeting cellular decline. In 2022, you published a paper titled Urolithin A improves muscle strength, exercise performance, and biomarkers of mitochondrial health in a randomized trial in middle-aged adults. Your subjects in this study were healthy but overweight middle-aged adults who received oral doses of MitoPure. Can you talk about the design of this study and the key findings? Sure, absolutely. So, you know, after the first publication in 2019, in parallel, we also got the approval from the FDA to recognizing urolithin A as a food ingredient. And we started making plans for commercial launch of this product, the MitoPure, in the United States. And as a trialist, as a physician scientist, my first inclination and my first gut reaction was the perfect consumer is an aging consumer, 65, 70-year-olds, who would purchase this product and thinking about their muscle health and muscle energetics and quality. What we started seeing very fast was a lot of younger 40, 50-year-olds were purchasing this. And that led to what kind of data would they expect? What would we see? Because that led to the design of this particular randomized clinical trial where we said, okay, let's go after the younger population of 40 to 60-year-olds who may have already started sort of on the journey of declining muscle and mitochondrial health. And we chose folks who are sedentary and overweight with the idea that that, you know, that sort of back to our metabolic health discussion earlier, that that would be a stressor on their mitochondria and we would be able to see effects. So this was a three-arm study. We knew the two doses from our previous Nature Metabolism Phase 1 study of that urolithin A at 500 milligram a gram would give us a signature of improved mitochondrial health. We went longer. So this is a three-arm placebo control, each arm being around 30 subjects. Average age was about 52 years. BMI was, they were not obese, but they were almost obese. So BMI of around 29. And these folks were sedentary. They were, you know, most of the participants were not your standard physically active middle-aged folks. So we did a four-month intervention with assessments looking at physical performance and muscle strength at baseline and comparing to two and four months. And we did an incremental submaximal exercise test to calculate the impacts on their endurance as well. So in a summary, what we saw in this trial was on the physiology without changing. And we gave them, of course, advice not to change their physical activity levels. And we recorded their dietary records through the course. They did not, without changing their diets or physical activity levels. After four months with both doses of MitoPure compared to the placebo arm, we saw about a 10 to 12% increase in muscle strength. And in the higher doses, we saw clinically relevant improvements in these folks walking further. So this is a test called the six-minute walk test that looks at the distance you can walk. And these folks walked about 33, 35 meters more compared to the other groups. And we saw even almost a 10% increase in peak VO2 levels at the higher doses. And we did biopsies and plasma withdraws and looked at all kinds of metabolomics. And we were able to show the same effects on mitochondrial signatures and at the metabolomic level that we saw in the older adults in this population. For our listeners, I think you mentioned it earlier, but talk about the content of each package of MitoPure. It's 500 milligrams, as I remember. Is that right? Yeah. So that's the commercial dose. 500 milligram is sufficient to keep your mitochondria happy, as I would say. But there are folks who sometimes are chronically fatigued or inflamed. And always they feel they have some sort of stressor in their system. And they do go higher because the gram dose has shown sort of even more incremental benefits. And so those are the two doses. But the package, so we have two products, actually. One is a pill, a soft gel that has each pill delivers 250 milligrams. So you need to take two a day. And then we have food flavored, actually a pomegranate berry flavored sachet. A lot of sports teams actually prefer to put that in smoothies versus taking the pills. And each packet delivers 500 milligrams of Eurot. Yeah, I've been taking MitoPure since it first came on the market. And you sort of intermittently take 1,000 milligrams, but most mornings 500. I hope my saying that doesn't discourage people from using your product to say, well, look at him. It didn't work. No, but that's actually what I do. There are days where I feel a bit underslept or fatigued. I do exactly what you're saying. I take a gram. And days where I'm already doing my physical activity, 30 minutes of running, I tend to take the 500 dose. Same here. Travel also can really. Yeah, sure. Jet lag. Yeah. Agreed. So a little different track in this question, but it's just a curiosity. Many therapies targeting mitochondria only seem to be effective when there is some type of existing dysfunction. Yeah. And those therapies then, if you're fortunate, perhaps restore the function. But you don't see it improving it above a normal healthy baseline in most cases. So what is it about healthy mitochondria versus diseased or dysfunctional mitochondria where there seems to be sort of a cap on physiologic function? Or is that just the perception from the literature? Do you have a good answer for that? To be honest, no. No, but we actually asked this question in a different way. After doing the studies in older adults where aging was a stressor and in the 40, 50-year-olds where being overweight and compromised metabolic health was a stressor, we started to hear these stories from sports teams. We heard about Tour de France cyclists who were buying our product. And I asked the same question. I was like, presumably, these athletes are at the peak of their not just mitochondrial health but probably muscle health. They're above the curve of what a healthy human being in their peak physical performance would be. And it turns out that a lot of these folks overtrain. And sometimes they get also inflamed. And actually, one of the top sports researchers started to give mitopure to an NBA athlete who was getting injured repeatedly. And she then came to me and said, let's do a clinical study. So, the short answer is that maybe in the case where overtraining is happening, even if these individuals have a VO2 max of about 65, 70, in a sort of recovery phase, it makes sense to bring the mitochondria back to homeostasis and accelerate mitophagy. So, just tying in this idea of exercise as potentially synergistic with urolithin A or other approaches to improve mitochondrial health. And I think we sort of hit on this already. But, you know, if exercise were indeed a pill, it would be prescribed to everyone. Unfortunately, the healthcare industry doesn't really provide tangible exercise prescriptions in most cases, which seems to be a problem. But instead, they prescribe pills. You mentioned antibiotics and others. But what we're talking about in terms of mitopure and its effects as a supplement, it seems to be, you know, a supplement to other lifestyle behaviors that are healthy, such as regular exercise, rather than a replacement for exercise. Is that how you see it? Absolutely, 200%. And I think I mentioned that. I see it as a third pillar that, you know, using nutrients that are well characterized, well studied, such as mitopure, that complement the two key pillars, which absolutely need to be there. And that's your exercise and physical activity levels and what you're eating in terms of health promoting diets or eating a metabolically challenging diet. That's how I see it, that these are complementary strategies. And we are actually now doing several trials with exercise plus urolithin A or comparing high protein in older adults to high protein plus mitopure to see if we can even break anabolic resistance to high protein and things like that. Very interesting. Very interesting. I understand, shifting a little bit here, that you have found lots of interesting sources of urolithin A. And one that the aforementioned Bertie told me about was the Iberian pigs in Spain. So I'm quite a fan of Iberian pigs, the ones with the black feet. You know, they're super delicious. And these pigs eat acorns pretty much exclusively. And as we understand it, acorns are a rich source of etologic tannins. So as a result, did you find urolithin A in the ham meat itself? That's true. That's correct. So one of the first challenges we were asked was to show that the molecule mitopure is absolutely identical to the natural urolithin A molecule. And so we did these extensive studies where actually in this part of Spain where, you know, as you mentioned correctly, acorns have one of the highest content, even more than pomegranates for etalitin A. And we only know that a lot of these Iberian pigs in the wild in Spain are eating them. And so we went and basically bought a lot from different butchery stores in this part of Spain, Iberian ham. And we started looking if urolithin A was found naturally there. And lo and behold, it was actually in considerable levels. The other sources we found urolithin A, albeit very low levels, were some of these oak-aged whiskeys and oak-aged wines. Because oak is also very rich in alleged tannins. So there you go. You've heard it from the expert. Eat delicious Iberian pork, preferably as ham, and have some whiskey. Or a little red wine. That's a good deal. Yeah. Not too much. No, no, just a little. Supplement it with Mitopur. We at IHMC have a very strong interest in osteoarthritis as well as a research focus. So I want to switch gears to a paper you had in Aging Cell. This showed Mitopur's potential to improve mitochondrial health in human cartilage itself. Osteoarthritis being one of the most common joint diseases leading to a major, major cause of physical disability. In this study, you demonstrated that supplementation with Mitopur for eight weeks only protected against osteoarthritic disease progression in an experimental model. Previous research showed that Mitopur could improve mitochondrial health and muscle function in both older and middle-aged adults, as we talked about. Can you discuss the potential Mitopur supplementation to reduce arthritis disease progression and, you know, just overall benefit joint health? Sure. Sure. Yeah. So I think this is a very collaborative and very excellent piece of evidence. We were collaborating with the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla with the group of Martin Lodz. And he had seen impaired autophagy and mitophagy in human chondrocytes from osteoarthritic patients. And he was looking at solutions that could recover or boost autophagy and mitophagy in those models. And so we collaborated and what he basically showed was that there was basically less damage, cartilage degeneration in the joints of these osteoarthritic models in rodents. There was less inflammation and joint pain. But the more key stuff was when you actually took from many osteoarthritic patients chondrocytes and you saw the compromise autophagy when you actually in ex vivo and cell culture put those with mitoperiodal tenae that you could actually bring a lot of their mitochondria and you could rewire autophagy and boost mitophagy. And so we've been talking. We haven't, to be honest, we haven't yet translated those findings into a randomized clinical trial. But we are discussing and that's probably something we'll do in the future. That's exciting and certainly a need for anything that would improve osteoarthritis and cartilage issue is just major as people pass through life. Yeah, mobility in general, right? I mean, if you can hit on muscle, muscle joints and inflammation and one sort of, then you have a good solution. Absolutely. Much as we were just discussing of the research involving urolith NA supplementation really has been focused on skeletal muscle. And that makes sense for lots of reasons, as well as you just mentioned cartilage cells. An oral dose of urolith NA would be expected to have effects on other mitochondrial dense tissues, I would imagine. And so I was wondering, have there been any research looking at effects observed in tissues like liver or cardiac tissue? We are still a very small research-focused nutrition company. And so, you know, all the hard yards, as you pointed out, have focused on health span and muscle longevity. A lot of people since the 2016 and 19 publication have, a lot of academic groups have picked up the interest in the molecule. So if I had to summarize, I think the interest today is mostly in three directions. And I'll tell you where we are now focusing our efforts. So the Buck Institute of Aging has found urolith NA to be out of hundreds of natural molecules that they have screened in mitophagy to actually clear up the waste in neuron cells and cognitive declines. So they have published multiple papers recently showing how urolith NA is able to delay or reverse a lot of the cognitive decline. And again, as you were mentioning, in mitochondrial dense cells like the neurons that get compromised because of poor mitochondrial health. And then a lot of metabolic health and GI research coming out of University of Louisville and University of Kentucky showing impacts on insulin resistance and metabolic health models of Nafal, fatty liver. So our efforts today are actually starting up and we are trying to publish our findings on cardiac. We have some excellent data using transmission electron microscopy and how aging hearts, just the mitochondria in aging hearts, totally lose their structure and become like old folks who don't want to talk to each other. They fragment and the cristae just is like burnt spaghetti. And by giving urolith NA supplementation, we can pretty much bring the mitochondria in cardiac tissue back to sort of a very youthful state. So this is something we are looking forward to publish. That is interesting. I was wondering about cardiac tissue. We also discussed, you mentioned the Buck Institute. We discussed urolith NA at length on episode 118 with Julie Anderson from the Buck. Yeah, so Julie is doing great work on exactly what I described on the impact of mitophagy and the decline of mitophagy in the aging brain and how, and I think her recent publications have shown that in different models of neurodegeneration, urolith NA was probably one of the few things that was able to rescue. So we are very excited. And her group, and there's another group in the National Institute of Aging, it's the group of Willem Boer, just published that not only as a therapeutic strategy, but even if you, most of these models of neurodegenerative decline develop it later in the middle ages, as they would say, and only then they intervene. And Willem Boer's group has shown that if you intervene early on, right from the young age, that even urolith NA has a preventive effect. So we are very excited about its promise on brain aging, and we are looking to collaborate now with a few groups on translating this in humans. So the research reported in these papers and others that we've been discussing are representative of why there is so much excitement today about urolith NA. In terms of new research, you have a number of studies in the pipeline that you mentioned looking at urolith NA's potential, including some studies where it's taken in conjunction with exercise, potentially looking for synergism. You have a study we understand involved, it's a randomized controlled trial in collaboration with both the Buck Institute and Goethe University, to see if urolith NA can improve the immune health of middle-aged adults by improving mitochondrial function and mitochondrial health. How far along is this trial, and can you talk a little bit about it? Because the immune system, you mentioned inflammation earlier, but a direct effect on the immune system is a really interesting direction for this. Yeah, sure. Well, for your listeners, I mentioned I'm a trained immunologist, and for almost the last 15 years, I've been harboring this thought that all these trials I've been running extremely thick in muscle aging take a lot of time to not only conduct, but I have a hard time convincing 75-year-olds to undergo a muscle biopsy twice or thrice during the course of a clinical study. And I was always wondering, could you resort to something less non-invasive, take a few drops of blood and study, systemically the effects, and maybe that would give you a quicker and easier readout? So we started looking at white blood cells and storing them. So we had banged them from our 2009 study, and very recently we said, okay, let's look at the mitochondrial gene signature on peripheral blood leukocytes, which are these white blood cells, to see if what we were seeing in muscle would be recapitulated in these immune cells. And lo and behold, in that trial that was published in 2019, we saw a similar signature. So that kicked off the idea to actually design a full-scale randomized clinical trial, and we started collaborating with Professor Eric Wardine, the buck, and another professor in Gautz University, Professor Florian Gretin, who had just described another paper in a rodent model of cancer where he showed that urolitin A was actually reviring and boosting mitophagy in these T cells that you need to fight off infections in cancer. And so we designed this trial in 2022. We started recruitment in 2023, and it has just finished. The buck has, earlier in the year, finished all the analysis. And what we have done, which probably makes this a very unique study, is that we have done deep immune phenotyping. Now, what that means is with a very small amount of blood, you can look at 40 different immune populations and look at 80 different immune markers. So in one go, you can characterize the effect of a molecule like urolitin A on not just your entire immune system, but the mitochondrial health of each of the immune cells that run around in our bodies. And what we see, and this was just presented earlier, I believe, in May and will again be presented soon in another meeting called Aging Research in Copenhagen. To summarize, it was that MitoPure intake in middle-aged adults was able to boost the number of CD8-naive T cells. Now, these are cells that decline with aging. They are more like your stem cell-like T cells that, as we age, we lose the percentage in our blood. So MitoPure was able to boost the numbers of these stem cell-driven CD8 T cells. And then they had more mitochondria, they had more PGC-1-alpha in the immune cells, and they functioned better. So if you put a bacteria like E. coli in system, the immune cells would phagocytose better. So these are our first findings, and we're in the process of writing it up very soon. Earlier, you mentioned that overtraining might induce mitochondrial dysfunction. And there's another recently completed randomized control trial that I want to talk about with elite runners, and this trial was to assess exactly that, whether overtraining does induce mitochondrial dysfunction, and perhaps more importantly, whether your urolithin A supplementation has an impact on muscle recovery. Because of our work at IHMC, with military populations and others, we're particularly interested in this kind of thing. So I wondered if you would tell us about the key takeaways from this trial and what you learned. Sure. So this is work done with a group of Professor Louise Burke in Australian Catholic University in Melbourne. And her group has probably led the whole field of sports research in terms of studying the number of intervention. And so she came, gosh, in 21, she came to us and she wanted to test urolithin A if it would improve A, performance, and B, would help accelerate recovery in these middle and long distance runners. And the problem was we realized two Olympics came in between, and a lot of these runners were training for Olympics. And so it took us a while to find 40 plus highly competitive elite runners. But what we did this study and what we see in this study is essentially that after four weeks of supplementation in this very elite population, we see about a 5% increase in VO2 max, which is a big deal for this population compared to placebo. We don't see that big an effect on performance. We do see about a 2% improvement, which I believe was, this is still unpublished, but it was not statistically significant. But the key data that's coming out from this is that the recovery is much better. So if you look at markers of muscle damage like creatinine kinase that are, you know, with overtraining that just pick up in the blood of these athletes, you kind of blunt the muscle damage response and the athletes felt less fatigued. So, you know, in most sports, they give you these sort of subjective RPE ratings of perceived exertion scales, and the athletes in the mitopure group felt less fatigued compared to. So, yeah, so we think the recovery piece, and that's what we hear routinely, actually, from a lot of athletes, that they have blunted the inflammation and they have better recovery, less muscle damage. That's seeming to be the primary beneficial effect these days from ketone ester supplementation. You know, in early days, it was thought to be massively performance enhancing because you would see it in Tour de France athletes benefiting. And it looks now like it's, that's possible, but it looks much more likely that it's beneficial recovery. And it won't surprise me, I think ketones are also an alternative fuel switch, so I'm sure they're having an impact on mitochondrial health. And there's big, you know, sort of interaction between muscle damage, inflammation, and mitochondrial health. Right, they also suppress inflammation. And so I'm starting to think of it more on those lines than as the, initially, you know, we were thinking of it more in terms of strictly fuel and thinking more now in terms of signaling functions and others. Yeah. So, continuing along these lines, I understand that there are even more studies in works. And, you know, with this much interest in Uralith and A, it's not surprising that the marketplace is suddenly flooded with all kinds of products. You can't really tell by looking at them online what's in them and do they even contain any Uralith and A. How is Timeline dealing with this? And do you have any advice for the consumers? I'm sure after listening to this interview, many listeners are going to think, oh, this is interesting. But then they go online and it's just the wilderness of products. Yeah. You know, this is the, let's say, the problem aspect of the vitamins, minerals, and supplement space, right? You have a trendy, scientifically studied new ingredient. And suddenly, as you're saying, the whole marketplace is flooded. In fact, there's a recent publication from a group in National University of Singapore that looked at a lot of the longevity products on NAD and Uralith and A. And actually, in this Uralith and A, they found only two out of all the products that met the label claim. We can confirm, but I suspect those two are our products. We have taken a look at multiple different products out there. And I can put my reputation here on the line by saying that two-thirds of them are exactly what you said. They don't even have a trace of the active molecule. So, that's the problem. Let's say you do 15 years of research, you get the grass approval, you study it clinically, and that's what you're recommending. But then you have this competition. So, I have only advice that, you know, be careful if you want to take the product that is clinically backed and that is approved by FDA. And not if it's selling for half the price, but actually may not have anything in there. So, yeah. This is a rampant problem in nutraceutical business, isn't it? I mean, we see this a lot with, you know, there's a growth factor that's been studied and people understand that it might be beneficial to muscle. And therefore, we're going to find it in multiple supplements, whether it's actually there or not. So, kudos to you for investigating this. And, you know, it's unfortunate, but the consumer needs to have the data to be informed. Yeah. And I think that's where we separate. You know, our North Star always has been evidence-based science and bringing the data. And as a small company today, as you were saying, we have now partnered with the National Institute of Aging, National Cancer Institute, all kinds of top universities that are studying everything from COPD, cancer to prediabetes, with or without exercise. So, that's the way to take it forward is to raise the bar. And soon, I believe, the ones that have no science will disappear. Well, Anirag, this has been a really fun and fascinating discussion. Switching gears maybe to a little bit of your free time, if you have any there in Switzerland. You've been there 16 years. Have you done any skiing or hiking in the Swiss Alps? Oh, yeah. I just love hiking. I mean, this is, you know, one of the  when I moved from the U.S. to Switzerland, I thought this was a two-year gig and I would be back either in the States or in my home country. But over the years, it's just, you know, the quality, just the flexibility that, you know, from our office, you don't see it. But I see the Alps just 20 minutes away. You can start climbing a beautiful mountain and see the lake. So, hiking is definitely always  every weekend, if the weather holds, it's a good hike. Skiing, I do it with my daughter. She's a good skier, but not too big a fan. That sounds like me. I spend a lot of time in Wyoming and Wyoming is famous for skiing in Jackson. But  and that's okay. But I much prefer hiking. Hiking is just  I think it's good not only for your body, but of course your brain is part of your body. But it's good cognitively as well, I think, and psychologically. Absolutely. Well, we want to thank you for being our guest today. We will be sure to keep an eye on the many clinical trials you have in the pipeline and wish you the best of success in all of that great work. Yeah, sure. It was a pleasure, absolute pleasure talking with you both. And, yeah, offline we can chat if there are possibilities to do something there in Florida with you guys. Absolutely. Look forward to it. And thank you for doing the interview. We really appreciate it. Same here. Thanks for taking the time. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Well, of course, I enjoyed the discussions about Anyurag's research into the importance of maintaining muscle strength as we age. I also found it interesting how so much of his work dovetails with the studies we are doing here in our Healthspan Resilience and Performance Research Complex at IHMC. Yes, Marcus, it certainly does dovetail nicely. And several of us at IHMC are really interested in Uralithin A. It has long been known that exercise activates metophagy and improves mitochondrial function. But Anyurag has done a great job of demonstrating that Uralithin A does this as well. Yeah, it's indeed exciting future in the field. This is Marcus Bauman signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stem Talk. Thank you for listening to Stem Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, stemtalk.us. There you can also find more information about the guests we interview. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.