 Welcome to STEM Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host, Dawn Kornagas, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is the man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all the guests who appear on STEM Talk. Hi, Dawn. Great to be here. So today, our guest is Dr. Joanne Manson, who is an endocrinologist, epidemiologist, and principal investigator of several impactful research studies, including the Landmark Women's Health Initiative. She is a highly cited researcher and was one of the physicians that was featured in the National Library of Medicine's exhibition, History of American Women Physicians. Her primary research interests include clinical prevention trials of nutritional and also lifestyle factors that are related to heart disease, diabetes, and cancer, and also the role of endogenous exogenous estrogens as determinants of chronic disease. Before we get to our interview with Dr. Manson, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to STEM Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the wittiest and most lavishly praised field reviews to read on STEM Talk. If you hear your review read on STEM Talk, just contact us at stemtalk at IHMC.us to claim your official STEM Talk t-shirt. Today, our weaning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker AJ Farmer, and the review reads like this, in an effort to get off of YouTube, what a good idea. I began listening to podcasts and really enjoyed Ben Bickman. I enjoyed your interview with Ben so very much. It was the best I've heard from him of all that are out there. I loved hearing about his growing up years and all the most important things I've been wanting to learn from him in one interview. I loved hearing the questions you asked, and I love how professional you are. So many podcasts are hard to listen to, but not with you. I looked over the other episodes, and I am excited to listen to them and get so much motivation for taking care of my health each day. Thank you. Well, thank you so much, AJ Farmer, and thanks to all of our other STEM Talk listeners who've helped STEM Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now on to today's interview with Dr. Joanne Manson. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. Hi, welcome to STEM Talk. I'm your host, Dawn Cornegas, and joining us today is Joanne Manson. Joanne, welcome to the podcast. Great to be here, Dawn. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Dawn, and hello, Joanne. Hi, Ken. So, Joanne, you said that when you went to medical school, your plans were ultimately to have your own clinical practice. So, what drew you to endocrinology? Yes, so I was really drawn to medicine because it was, for me, a perfect blend of my love of science, biology, with taking care of patients and service to society. It just seemed perfect. And my goal was really taking care of patients and hanging out a shingle in internal medicine and endocrinology. And what drew me to endocrinology was that I would be seeing patients with diabetes, which was a great interest of mine. I thought there would be a lot of opportunity for prevention, counseling, and working closely with patients in terms of modifying nutrition, physical activity. And also, in general, endocrine is working with patients who have hormonal problems, such as too high or too low a level of thyroid hormone or adrenal hormones. And these are conditions where you can really see great benefits from treatment, and the patient will feel better and be cured virtually, even within weeks. So, I very much like that aspect of it. For some of the parts of endocrine. But of course, diabetes is a chronic disease, whether type 1 or type 2. So, that also appealed to me, working with patients, where I also thought there would be a large role of prevention and working closely with patients on nutrition, physical activity, other lifestyle counseling. Your interest in the prevention of disease and disease states grew from things you witnessed early on in your medical career, as I understand it. Can you share how that influenced you? When I was doing my fellowship in endocrinology, after I trained in internal medicine, I was seeing many patients with diabetes and late-stage complications, such as kidney disease, eye disease, vision loss, the cardiovascular diseases. And I thought that this was really so unfortunate that there were so many patients with very late stages of complications from diabetes, when type 2 diabetes, the most common form, more than 90% of diabetes cases, is highly preventable with certain lifestyle interventions and nutrition and physical activity. So, I became more interested in working in the field of prevention research. What could be done? What information could be given to the public to try to prevent chronic diseases that are highly preventable and modifiable? And Joanne, your interest in women's health has had some deeply personal influences. So, we understand that your mother died from ovarian cancer as you were just beginning your medical training, and obviously, that had a major impact on you. Yes, I became very committed to working in the field of women's health and seeing that so many women's health issues were really understudied. Conditions that were predominantly or exclusively in women affecting women were understudied, often really lagged behind in terms of both prevention and treatment. And so, I became very committed to women's health research, and that has been a focus of most of my research over the decades. And you said that your desire to go beyond the teachings of medical school, which is really more about learning about the pathology of chronic diseases, not about preventing them, that led you to acquire the tools that you felt you needed in epidemiology and clinical trials. So, what specifically led to your interest in clinical research? I wanted to learn more about the methods and design of research studies than I had learned in medical school. I think that in general, in medical school, you don't really learn how to do research. You can do some bench research, and there's some opportunities to do rotations in research. But in terms of getting the tools of epidemiology, biostatistics, design of studies, implementation of clinical trials, there really was not a lot of teaching on that subject in medical school. So, because I was so much interested in prevention of type 2 diabetes, and also increasingly prevention of cardiovascular disease, I felt it would be helpful to go back to school for a while and gain some of those tools in study design, methodology, biostatistics, and be able to do randomized clinical trials and observational studies related to these health conditions. Yeah, and just noting that public health research is very different than laboratory research. So, Joanne, what was most valuable to you about your master's and PhD work in public health at Harvard? And that's where you still work today, just by the way. I think that the research was so valuable because it had such a clear relevance to humans. You know, often when you're doing research in the lab, you wonder, okay, is this research in mice or rats, is it going to be relevant to humans? The research I was involved with was clearly relevant because it was in large studies of men and women and, you know, of people. And I was able to learn the methods for doing the observational studies, you know, looking at what people are doing in terms of lifestyle behaviors and their health outcomes, as well as gaining the tools for doing randomized clinical trials to test different interventions in trying to prevent these chronic diseases. You and many others are interested, as you've noted, in prevention, but the healthcare system doesn't seem particularly focused on that. Is this a part of what led you to be involved in the nurses' health study? Yes, absolutely. We really do have a disease care system in the U.S., not a healthcare system with a priority to prevent disease and maintain health. And I was very much interested in working with this large-scale cohort of women. The nurses' health study, I started out with the nurses' health study, one shortly after. There was a new study in even younger nurses looking at some of the risk factors and health outcomes in women and younger age groups. But the two studies together really have allowed me to look at many health outcomes, particularly type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease, and focus on nutrition and physical activity and many other factors. For listeners who aren't familiar with the nurses' health study, could you give us an overview of this important study? The nurses' health study, one, the original study, included more than 120,000 women nationwide, and they were aged 30 to 55 at the start of the study in 1976. So this study has been going on for really more than 50 or close to 50 years at this point. And the nurses' health study began in 1989, and that was again with about 120,000 U.S. nurses. These are all registered nurses in these two studies. And the women in nurses' health study were aged 25 to 42. The original goals of the nurses' health study were aged 25 to 42. The original goals of the nurses' one and two were to look in more detail at oral contraceptives and health outcomes. But the goals expanded tremendously after the early years to look at really all aspects of reproduction, reproductive factors, lifestyle behaviors, expanded very deeply into nutrition, physical activity, and many different behavioral factors. The nurses' health study is an observational study, but it held a nugget of something that would be pursued in the women's health study, that women taking hormone therapy had a lower risk of heart disease and a reduction in all-cause mortality. So you've said that the nurses' health study did get the right answer, but it was to a different question. So what do you mean by that? Well, many of the findings in the nurses' health study and other observational studies actually generated hypotheses to be tested in the Women's Health Initiative randomized clinical trials. So, for example, the nurses' health study did see a lower risk of heart disease among the women who chose to take hormone therapy or whom their providers, their healthcare providers, chose to prescribe hormone therapy for them. And, of course, there can be certain selection factors. Maybe the clinicians were choosing healthier women to prescribe hormones to. Maybe the women who are more health conscious and were more physically active, had healthier diets, maybe they were more likely to be interested in hormone therapy. It's very difficult to fully control for all those factors, which is why a randomized clinical trial, where all those other factors will balance out very equally between the group given the treatment, such as hormone therapy versus the group given placebo, is so important to do. But it turned out, after we delved much more deeply into the findings from the Women's Health Initiative, that many of the nurses' health study findings were borne out even in a randomized clinical trial, but not entirely. I really do not think we got the full answer from the nurses' health study. There was still some confounding by healthier women using hormone therapy in observational studies, confounding by socioeconomic status, education, many lifestyle behaviors. And even though you adjust for those factors, there's still some potential for what we call confounding that can influence the results. But we did tend to see more favorable benefit-risk ratios in the Women's Health Initiative among the women who started hormone therapy in early menopause. And what the nurses' health study was looking at was primarily women who started hormone therapy in early menopause. Even if they continued it for hormone therapy for a decade or longer, they were still primarily starting early in menopause. So those findings among the younger women in early menopause aligned reasonably well between the WHI, the Nurses' Health Study, and the WHI Women's Health Initiative. However, the results were very different between the Nurses' and Women's Health Initiative in terms of the older women, women who were more than a decade past the onset of menopause. That's really interesting. And we'll probably loop back to that a little bit. What do you think has been the impact of the Nurses' Health Study on public health and more specifically on women's health? I think the Nurses' Health Study has had a tremendous impact because this is such a large-scale study. As I mentioned, 120,000 in Nurses' one and close to 120,000 in Nurses' two with very long duration, decades and decades of follow-up with the accrual of many incident cases of heart disease, stroke, breast cancer, other cancers, type 2 diabetes, many other chronic diseases. So we have learned so much, not only from these two Nurses' Health Study cohorts, but also from so many other research studies, observational studies, epidemiologic studies throughout the world about women's health. But there still is a real role for randomized clinical trials where they're feasible when you can ethically give an intervention and look at a direct cause and effect relationship. And we did learn a lot from the randomized clinical trials that were done related to hormone therapy. And we'll talk also about calcium, vitamin D, and dietary factors. So, Joanne, you were in the research division at Brigham and Women's Hospital doing your training at the Harvard School of Public Health when you got the chance to become a principal investigator in the Women's Health Initiative. And that's a project that began back in 1993. So can you tell us how that came about? So the first woman director of the National Institutes of Health, Dr. Bernadine Healy, went to Congress and made a case that women's health was severely underfunded and that there were many pressing research questions related to women's health that needed to be addressed. And she asked for a large allocation of funding for women's health research, which ultimately became the Women's Health Initiative. And this was in the early 1990s. And in 1992, 1993, the Women's Health Initiative was being designed. And there was a call by the National Institutes of Health for applications to investigators and clinical centers to become involved in the WHI and to help recruit for the study and follow up long term the study participants. So we applied, actually applied in 1992 and were selected as one of the original 16 Vanguard centers for recruitment for the site. Ultimately, there were 40 clinical centers around the country recruiting participants for the WHI. And I was a principal investigator for the Boston site of recruitment. There was only one site in Boston, and that was at Brigham and Women's Hospital. Can you give us a little bit of context for the Women's Health Initiative itself? How was this initiative designed and how were the women recruited to participate? And what were the specific questions that the Women's Health Initiative was meant to answer? So the WHI was planned to be a representative cohort of women from around the country with diverse race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, educational background. In order to do randomized clinical trials, the three randomized clinical trials were of hormone therapy, of a combined calcium plus vitamin D supplement, and of a low-fat dietary pattern high in fruits, vegetables, and grains. And to look at the role of those interventions in the prevention of various chronic diseases and the benefit-risk ratio. In this diverse study population with an age range of 50 to 79, it was meant to be representative of post-menopausal women in a fairly broad age range with a mean age, average age of 63. And it really was intended to address some of the most pressing questions that women had about maintaining good health during menopause. And there were many interventions and treatments that were being used, but without a lot of rigorous evidence, without randomized clinical trials. Because, in fact, ironically, the only randomized trial that had been done of estrogen therapy was in men in order to see if it could favorably affect cholesterol levels and lower risk of heart disease in men, given that women tended to have lower rates of heart disease than men, and could giving estrogen to men actually be helpful for their hearts. It's so ironic that the hormone therapy had never been tested at large-scale randomized clinical trial in women to see if it prevented heart disease and to see the overall balance of benefits and risks. There was also a large observational component of the Women's Health Initiative. So of the 160,000 U.S. women nationwide, again, age 50 to 79, who were enrolled in the WHO, about 60,000 were in, closer to 68,000 were in the randomized clinical trials, and a little over 90,000 were in the observational cohort, where they were being followed up, you know, providing information on questionnaires about their health practices, providing bloods and urine, in some cases, urines doing a number of biomarker studies and looking at the association with long-term health. So you've noted that the three interventions that were evaluated in the Women's Health Initiative were hormone therapy, calcium and vitamin D supplementation, and a low-fat dietary pattern. So let's talk about hormone therapy first. So one of the first big questions that you tackled here was what formulation of hormone therapy should be tested. Can you talk a little bit more about that? This was actually, Dawn, a difficult decision by the investigators and by the NIH. What formulation to use? However, at the time that the WHI was being designed in the early 1990s, by far the most common formulation of hormone therapy was conjugated estrogen with or without a progestogen. The most common progestogen was medroxyprogesterone acetate. And the progestin is added only to protect the uterus in women who have an intact uterus. Women who have a hysterectomy do not need to take a progestin. They can take estrogen alone. So there were actually two separate hormone therapy trials in the WHI. Estrogen plus progestin in women with an intact uterus and estrogen alone among women with hysterectomy. And the main outcome of interest was heart disease. The reason the oral conjugated estrogen and the medroxyprogesterone acetate were decided on as the formulation was because they were the most commonly used. And also because this large body of research on hormone therapy and risks of heart disease, stroke, all-cause mortality, many other health outcomes was based on conjugated estrogen. Women, you know, using these hormones, this most common formulation versus women not taking hormone therapy. So there was concern that if a different formulation was used that hadn't been tested, very robustly tested in observational studies, a newer formulation such as transdermal through the skin, patch or gel, estradiol, that if the findings were negative or not showing a reduction in heart disease or a favorable benefit-risk ratio, it could be blamed on the fact that the formulation that had generated the hypotheses that had been used in so many of the observational studies had not been tested in the WHI. So the decision was made to go with the oral conjugated estrogen with and without the medroxyprogesterone acetate. So can you give our listeners some context into the finding that women taking the combination of conjugated estrogens and medroxyprogesterone acetate or progestin had higher risks of breast cancer and stroke? Yes. So at the end of the WHI, in fact, the hormone therapy trials were stopped early. It was planned that they would go for about eight years. The estrogen plus progestin trial was stopped three years early because it was clear that the risks were outweighing the benefits. And this was particularly because there was no signal for heart protection, but there was evidence for an increased risk of blood clots in the legs and lungs, what we call pulmonary embolism or venous thrombosis, an increased risk of stroke, and also an increased risk of breast cancer. This was with the combination estrogen plus progestin. On the positive side, there was a significant more than 30% reduction in hip fracture and osteoporotic fractures were benefited. And also there was a reduction in type 2 diabetes and some other outcomes that emerged with later analyses. All-cause mortality was actually completely neutral. There was no increase in all-cause mortality in the hormone therapy arm compared to the placebo arm. But there were these various adverse outcomes that we later saw were driven primarily by the women who were at least 10 years past the onset of menopause and less so by the women in early menopause. The women in early menopause, younger ages tended to have lower rates of adverse events and somewhat more favorable benefit-risk profile than the older women with hormone therapy. But we still conclude that hormone therapy should not be used for the express purpose of trying to prevent heart disease, stroke, stroke, dementia, other chronic conditions, but more should be reserved for treatment of hot flashes, night sweats, menopausal symptoms of that nature in early menopause. That was very interesting. And when you account it for age, was the worst outcomes in the older women accounted for by their more advanced age, or was it strictly an effect of the hormone treatment? So there were, in terms of absolute risks, there were many more adverse events in the older women, women more distant from onset of menopause, and that was a function of higher baseline risks in those age groups. However, I think, Ken, you're asking this very interesting question about whether the hormone therapy actually had a different kind of effect in younger women than older women, in terms of were the relative risks different? For example, were there increased risk of heart disease or stroke or various outcomes only in the older women? In general, with estrogen plus progestin, the relative risks were quite similar. In the younger women and the older women, they all showed these signals for increased risk of the blood clots in the legs and lungs, and increased risk of a stroke and increased risk of breast cancer. However, with estrogen alone, there were some real qualitative differences in that the younger women did seem to have a clear signal for a lower risk of heart disease and heart attack. With the estrogen alone, without the addition of a progestin, and overall, you know, all-cause mortality tended to be reduced in the younger women with the estrogen alone. But again, it was a borderline finding. We're not recommending women be using these hormones for the purpose of trying to prevent chronic disease or reduce all-cause mortality risk. We're just saying there were signals that hormone therapy can be safely used in early menopause, women below, starting in women below the age of 60 or within the first 10 years of onset of menopause. Hormone therapy appears to be safe for use for treatment of hot flashes, night sweats, and these other symptoms. And the WHI results really should not be used as a reason to deny hormone therapy to women in early menopause who have moderate to severe or bothersome hot flashes, night sweats, menopausal symptoms, and are seeking relief from these symptoms and seeking improvement in quality of life. Many of these women are good candidates and continue to be appropriate candidates for hormone therapy, but it's a personalized decision-making process. It really does have to be individualized, shared decision-making between the clinician and the patient. I'm glad you clarified that. I have heard that study used as a reason not to offer hormone therapy to women. And for the sake of clarity, the estrogen involved, was that the oral conjugated estrogen, right? In the WHI, in both of the trials, it was the oral conjugated estrogen. Thanks. So following up on all of this, what has been learned as folks, including yourself, follow these women for their breast cancer risk over the subsequent 20 years or so? Well, the findings have actually been very surprising. There is a clear difference between estrogen combined with progestin and estrogen taken alone and risk of breast cancer with long-term follow-up. In fact, they're polar opposite effects. They're like mirror images of each other. So with estrogen plus progestin, this is in the women who had intact uterus, no hysterectomy. These women began to see an increased risk of breast cancer emerging by about four to five years of treatment. And then that increased risk has persisted during the long-term follow-up. It's about a 40% to 50% increase or even lower at some time points, closer to 30% to 40% increased risk. But it has persisted. In contrast, estrogen alone, the oral conjugated estrogen alone without any progestin, was associated with a lower risk of breast cancer that began to emerge within... It was already apparent as a signal during the intervention phase, which lasted seven years. But by 10, 11 years, it became statistically significant. And with longer follow-up, up to 20 years, it has continued to be a substantial, more than 30% reduction in risk of breast cancer, and also a statistically significant reduction in the risk of death from breast cancer. So completely opposite results with estrogen plus progestin and estrogen alone. And what are the implications for clinical practice? Well, first, when looking at benefit-risk ratios and individualized counseling for hormone therapy, in a woman who has an intact uterus, has not had hysterectomy, she may really want to think about limiting the duration of hormone therapy to only five, seven years, not going much longer than that, or at least factoring breast cancer into the benefit-risk equation. So that, you know, looking at her risk factor profile, she may still be a candidate for longer-term treatment if she has high risk of osteoporosis and is a candidate for other osteoporosis medications. And she really wants to take hormone therapy as a very low risk of breast cancer, no family history. She may want to continue, but it has to be a shared decision-making process. With estrogen alone, in contrast, risk of breast cancer is not clearly within the benefit-risk equation and the decision-making process at least for the first 10 years of use. And we think that this may be particularly with the conjugated estrogen, that they may have a tamoxifen-like effect. Conjugated estrogen has, in some studies, had some of the properties of a, what we call selective estrogen receptor modulator. There does it acts as an estrogen in some tissues and anti-estrogen in other tissues, such as what tamoxifen does. But we're increasingly seeing, we recently published a meta-analysis of all of the randomized trials that had looked at estrogen alone, whether it was conjugated estrogen or estradiol. And overall, in the combined analysis, there continued to be a signal for a lower risk of breast cancer. So when estrogen is used alone, it's possible it does not increase risk of breast cancer. This doesn't mean that estrogen should be used long-term for no reason at all, no clear indication, because at some point that may turn around to there being an increased risk of breast cancer. But we're not seeing clear evidence from randomized trials, given the relatively limited duration of these randomized clinical trials. I think there are also some messages here in terms of whether, you know, certainly women who have a uterus, they need to take the progestin. So estrogen alone should not be used in women who have an intact uterus. But it may make a difference in terms of some of the decision-making processes. So because of the WHI's findings, it's much more common now to use transdermal estradiol rather than the pill form evaluated in the original trial. The way these two forms of hormone are synthesized in the body matters to the risk-benefit ratio. Is that correct? Yes, absolutely. So the estradiol that is given in the FDA-approved estradiol medications, the patches, the gels, these are much more similar to the estrogen produced naturally in the body. Also, when it is given through the skin, as opposed to a pill form, which goes directly to the liver, you know, through the portal circulation to the liver and in the liver can increase the synthesis of clotting factors and certain proteins that may enhance the risk of clotting, there's more of a risk than a venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism when it's given as a pill. So when it can be taken as a patch or a gel or a spray on the skin and it doesn't go directly to the liver and also lower doses can be used now. There's more variety in the options available to women in terms of doses and formulations. It would be expected that there would be a lower risk of blood clots in the legs and lungs and maybe even a lower risk of stroke, which is often related to blood clots forming. But the caveat is that we don't yet have the large-scale randomized clinical trials to prove or to really confirm that the transdermal through the skin patch gel form of estradiol and let's say given with a bioidentical form of progesterone instead of MPA using micronized progesterone, we don't yet have the large-scale clinical trials showing that that has a more favorable benefit-risk ratio than the formulations tested in the WHI. But there's a great deal of evidence from observational studies and from looking at biomarkers, like clotting factor levels, that the estrogen given through the skin, patch gel spray, that that will be less likely to increase clotting risk than estrogen given as a pill going directly to the liver. Really good answer. Thank you for that. Thank you. STEM Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, locomotion, healthspan, resilience, and performance. So, Joanne, you mentioned that the use now of estradiol, which is more like the estrogen that women naturally produce, may avoid some of the risks in the older forms originally tested in the WHI. Would it be protective in terms of cognitive decline? It actually may be protective. There's a very strong hypothesis that if estradiol, the more natural form of estrogen, is given very early in menopause, that it may slow cognitive decline, memory loss, and some of those adverse cognitive outcomes. However, we don't yet have clear evidence from randomized clinical trials that estradiol or conjugated estrogen started early in menopause will lead to protection against cognitive decline. What we do have is several randomized trials showing neutral effects, no increased risk of cognitive decline with either estradiol or conjugated estrogen when started in early menopause, such as women 50 to 55 or in the KEEPS trial, women within three years of the onset of menopause. Those randomized trials suggest neutral effects, no adverse or deleterious effects. As we're seeing with the older women in the WHI memory study, the women age 65 and older did have a higher risk of dementia with the hormone therapy. The combination of conjugate estrogen and MPA was associated with a higher risk of dementia. In the older women above age 65 in WHI. In the younger women, it seems to be neutral. However, there's a great interest right now in looking at whether you can particularly get neurocognitive protection if you start early in menopause and the women have a moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms, hot flashes, night sweats, disrupted sleep. Some of those symptoms that have been linked to an increased risk of cognitive decline, especially if you can improve sleep, it would be expected that you might see some benefits of the estrogen given in early menopause. And this is when the symptoms are most likely to be severe or bothersome in early menopause as opposed to later menopause. One of the reasons why it could be mutually beneficial in that, you know, it would not only treat the symptoms and improve quality of life at times when the women are most affected by hot flashes, night sweats, but may also be more likely to have favorable effects on the benefit-risk ratio for chronic diseases, including cognitive decline. But it really does remain to be proven in large-scale randomized clinical trials. So we have a very strong interest in that question and other investigators are interested in that. And I think there will be additional research on this question, especially when women have symptoms, disrupted sleep, hot flashes, night sweats. Do they get a benefit in terms of cognitive function when hormone therapy is started early and relieves many of those symptoms and improves sleep? One would anticipate that they would just if sleep was improved. But I'm glad you're going to look into that and see if that's true. It does seem logical. I agree with you, Ken, that it would seem very likely that there should be that benefit. But so often research has been surprising with even paradoxical findings that were never expected. I think once there is the clear evidence in randomized clinical trials, it will make a big difference also in our understanding of the role of hormone therapy in the early menopause. I think so, too. Something I think we share a little bit of a pet peeve on is the way the term bioidentical hormones is used. It's almost become a marketing term rather than a clinical understanding. One can appreciate what the intent was, but it really is being used very aggressively in marketing. Did you have thoughts on that? Yes, I agree. It is primarily a marketing term. And I want to make a big distinction here. This more natural, quote unquote, form of estrogen called estradiol, also called a bioidentical form of estrogen. But it is available to women through FDA approved treatments. Treatments that have gone through very extensive testing for quality control testing you can get from prescribed by your regular doctor and at regular retail pharmacies. The really big concern is when you go to a compounding pharmacy and you don't get the FDA approved treatments, but you want to get, quote unquote, bioidentical estrogen through a compounding pharmacy, you have much less assurance about quality control. And often the dose that you get will be variable, will not have the same standardization of the content of the product. There can be impurities and contaminations introduced that has been shown in a number of studies and audits of the compounded treatments. And I think it is best to use the FDA approved products. They now come in many different doses, many different routes of administration and formulations. And there are so many options for women with FDA approved regulated products. It's better than going the compounded pharmacy route for getting what you think is something magical. And much more like the natural estrogen that women make. It is no more like natural estrogen than what you can get with estradiol through a retail pharmacy, an FDA approved product. Yes, I know many, many women using estradiol. And in most cases, you would have to wrestle it away from them. So the reaction is usually very positive, at least among the ladies I know. But again, women can get estradiol. Estradiol is available in FDA approved formulations, many different doses. It just needs to be the products that have already gone through the testing that are regulated by the FDA as opposed to getting the compounded products. I wasn't proposing compounding pharmacies. I was just saying the popularity is significant, at least among my cohort of people that I'm friends with. Totally agree with you. So can you talk a little bit about the role that paramenopausal birth control decisions can play in the management of hot flashes for women in their 40s and 50s? So menopausal hormone therapy itself has usually been reserved for women who have already had their final menstrual period and have gone through menopause. Whereas women in perimenopause or the menopause transition, which includes several years prior to the final menstrual period. This is a value to women who have very irregular periods, heavy bleeding, and also if they have hot flashes, night sweats, and they're getting these great fluctuations in their blood levels of estrogen, they can really benefit from a treatment. But they're usually not given the postmenopausal hormone therapy. They're more often given a low dose of oral contraceptives or birth control pills. And not only will those low dose birth control pills help to reduce their symptoms of hot flashes, night sweats will provide some symptom relief, but they also provide birth control. They will prevent unintended pregnancies. There is intermittent ovulation that occurs in women who have not yet gone through menopause. They have not only fluctuating hormone levels, but also fluctuating ovulation, meaning that they actually could become pregnant. And it's the birth control pills and the birth control treatments that will prevent the unintended pregnancies and provide contraception. But actually, the menopausal hormone therapy, that's lower levels of the hormones and would not necessarily prevent pregnancy. So I think it is an important distinction that women who are in their 40s and sometimes even into their very early 50s but have not yet had their final menstrual period are not yet menopausal. If they're having distressing symptoms, hot flashes, night sweats, bothersome symptoms, and very irregular periods, they may still be candidates for low dose oral contraceptives, which can be of a great help to them. And they can discuss that with their health care provider. Let's now talk about the second pillar of the Women's Health Initiative, the calcium and vitamin D supplementation trial, which tested whether this supplementation lowered the risk of hip fractures in postmenopausal women. So what did you find here? So the findings were actually complex, but overall, there was no significant reduction in the risk of hip fractures, which was the primary endpoint of the calcium plus vitamin D trial. We tested in WHI a low dose of vitamin D. It was only 400 IUs a day and 1,000 milligrams of calcium. What was interesting is that in the women who were 60 and older, where the fractures were more likely to be osteoporotic fractures, there actually was a significant close to 20% reduction of hip fractures. In the women who were not taking any of their own personal supplements of calcium or vitamin D, again, we saw a reduction, close to a 30% reduction in hip fracture with the calcium vitamin D intervention compared to placebo. But because the primary endpoint in the overall study population was not significantly reduced, hip fracture was not significantly reduced in the overall study population, the conclusion was that calcium and vitamin D supplementation should not be routinely prescribed or recommended for women in menopause, you know, women age 50 to 79 and older ages really hasn't been tested. But the point being that it shouldn't be a routine universal recommendation. But based on the WHI plus other evidence, it is very appropriate to use calcium and vitamin D supplementation to fill gaps in nutrition intakes, such as women who have low dietary intake of calcium or vitamin D. Let's say they have lactose intolerance and they very rarely have dairy products, which not only have the calcium but also are often fortified with vitamin D. They may be candidates to get up to the recommended amount of calcium, which is 1,200 milligrams a day of calcium for postmenopausal women and 600 to 800 IUs a day of vitamin D for women in those postmenopausal age groups. So basically, the recommendation is to use the supplements, only to fill the gaps, not in the higher dose that was, you know, like not necessarily 1,000 milligrams of calcium, but maybe it's only 500 milligrams of calcium needed to fill a gap between the amount through the diet and the total amount recommended for these age groups. But overall, we recommend trying to get adequate calcium and vitamin D from food sources, and many foods are fortified. Look at nutrition labels, but don't be afraid to take a supplement to fill in nutrition gaps. What was new about WHI was it was testing calcium and vitamin D in postmenopausal women at typical risk of fracture, not like the earlier trials, which had focused on women who already had a diagnosis of osteoporosis or a prior fracture, osteoporotic fracture, or were known to have low bone mineral density. It was actually focusing on usual risk women in these postmenopausal age groups and concluded that using calcium and vitamin D supplementation should not be a routine recommendation. So we've covered the first two pillars of the WHI. The third pillar, the dietary modification trial, looked at whether a low-fat dietary pattern reduced the risk of breast cancer or colorectal cancer and coronary heart disease. What did you find here? Well, it was really interesting, Dawn. We looked at a dietary pattern that in many observational studies had been linked to a lower risk of breast and colorectal cancer, and we wanted to see if modifying diet, especially reducing total fat, there wasn't a particular focus on the type of fat, unsaturated versus saturated, it was just reducing total fat and increasing fruits, vegetables, and grains could then reduce the risk of breast cancer. And heart disease was a secondary endpoint. Interestingly, we saw a borderline reduction in both the incidence and mortality from breast cancer during the 8.5-year intervention or treatment phase, but it wasn't until longer-term follow-up at 20 years that we saw statistically significant reduction in breast cancer death. And this began to emerge only with continuing to follow the women and look at the data, following with National Death Index and many other sources of information about breast cancer death. And we did see it emerging at later follow-up. And for heart disease, we did not see a reduction with this type of diet, but the focus here was on total fat as opposed to type of fat. For heart disease, it seems more important to focus on reducing certain types of fat, such as saturated trans fat, and even allowing or encouraging more of poly- and mono-unsaturated forms of fat, such as from fish and olive oil and types of fat, that nature, which have been linked in many studies, both observational and randomized trials with lower risks of cardiovascular disease. It's a fantastic answer. So what questions are left for the WHI to explore? Right. So many questions. I mean, really, I would say it's a treasure trove of opportunities for research. Maybe many of your listeners are interested in doing research or possibly collaborating. So, so many opportunities out there. Now, one focus we have is healthy aging. Why do some people become centenarians and maintain, because we have many WHI participants who are now in more than 100 years old, getting to be 105 years old, some of them. And we really want to understand what is leading to some people being able to have longer health span, not just lifespan, but health span, living longer without the development of major chronic diseases, which is what we call health span. And many people who do live past 100 have longer health span as well, because if they're developing, unfortunately, developing chronic diseases, such as heart disease, stroke, dementia, even type 2 diabetes and any form of diabetes, then very often the lifespan is also shorter. But particularly this question of staying healthy through a longer period of time. And we're delving deeply into this, using a lot of biomarkers for healthy aging, including, you know, the DNA methylation, epigenetic markers, using metabolomics, looking at small molecules and proteomics, looking at the various proteins in the blood and the patterns. We are really interested in trying to understand not only the role of lifestyle factors, nutrition, physical activity, but also the role of social determinants of health. How do neighborhood community factors influence the aging process? What are the stressors that people experience, including psychological, psychosocial stressors that can adversely affect health, individual factors, as well as community-based factors? So we're really trying to delve deeply into what is related to more favorable outcomes, you know, healthy aging and what can be done to mitigate or counteract some of the stresses that so many of us feel, regardless, you know, that's really very hard to avoid some of the, you know, psychosocial factors, social isolation, for example, depression, you know, what can be done to try to minimize the risk from some of these adverse stressors related to individual factors as well as community-based factors. So that's a strong interest of ours right now. That's great. And at IHMC, we share a strong interest in healthspan. In fact, we just opened a large new research complex titled Healthspan Resilience and Performance. And it's really focused on the kinds of issues and methods that you mentioned. So I'm so happy that you're heading in that direction, particularly with WHI and all the possibilities there. It's a goldmine of potential research. And also, as you're suggesting, you know, looking at what can be done to maintain good cognition and avoid dementia is just so important. And there's so much more research that needs to be done on that question. And, you know, a recent study in British Medical Journal actually suggested that much of dementia itself is preventable, that there are 14 factors that are modifiable and linked to prevention of cognitive decline and dementia. And this plays such an important role in healthspan and quality of life. There are so many research questions that we haven't yet even begun to tackle. And we're very excited about the future science as well. That's really good. Earlier, we talked a little bit, quite a bit, I guess, about menopausal symptoms and the consequences, perhaps, for cognitive impairment. And there was a recent report, very recent, in the journal Menopause. Could you tell us a little bit about that study and why those findings could be of note? Yes, I think that there's an increasing body of research linking these menopausal symptoms, the hot flashes, night sweats, and sleep disruption to adverse cognitive outcomes. And I think it is logical because we know sleep quality is tremendously important to cognition and to avoiding dementia. I mean, there's quite a bit of research on that question. And menopausal symptoms can be very disruptive to sleep. And there are more and more studies now linking hot flashes, night sweats, disrupted sleep, not only to cardiovascular disease, and there's some research out there for quite a while on that subject, but also now increasingly to cognitive decline. So what is considered cognitive impairment in these terms? Because I think intuitively it tracks that when your sleep is disrupted by hot flashes and your waking hours are disrupted as well, that your cognitive performance would suffer? Absolutely. I think in the short term, it could be just related to being fatigued and tired. But when you're seeing really long-term effects and a downward trajectory in terms of function, cognitive function performance on memory tests and the different types of cognitive tests that are administered, then you need to be a little more concerned that it isn't just a transient. Oh, I didn't sleep well last night. I'm having trouble remembering things. I'm, you know, it's very tough today or maybe tough for two days. I think what we really have to worry about is the long-term chronic effects where it really can affect the trajectory of memory loss and cognition. Yeah, absolutely. So multivitamins and memory are a topic of interest as well, and it's hard to escape advertising for various supplements that claim to improve brain health and memory function. So you and colleagues at Mass General Brigham recently completed research that shows the humble, comprehensive multivitamin can delay age-related declines in memory and cognitive function by an average of two years. So can you tell us a little bit more about that study? So in a large randomized trial that we're doing called COSMOS, the Cocoa Supplement Multivitamin Outcome Study, we included multivitamins mostly to look at potential benefits on reducing cancer risk because multivitamins had shown some benefits for cancer in an earlier study, the Physicians Health Study 2. But surprisingly, we saw that participants who were randomized to receive multivitamins versus those randomized to receive placebo, I mean, these groups were identical or virtually exactly the same in terms of all other factors, in terms of education and lifestyle practices and their general health status. Those randomized to multivitamins tended to do better on the memory tests and on the cognition tests and had less decline in memory and cognitive function over a three-year period. These were three separate studies, placebo-controlled studies within the larger COSMOS trial where we saw this. We did a meta-analysis of these three trials, of these three sub-studies, and saw that there was a really, really strong statistical significance to these differences between multivitamin, the multivitamin group, and the placebo group, like a p-value less than 0.001. And it was about the equivalent of slowing age-related memory loss and cognitive decline by about two years. So we're really interested in this question, want to follow up not only on the multivitamins, but also some cognitive benefits suggested by the cocoflavanols. And we think that not to replace healthy diet, but as a complement to healthy diet, some of these supplements may be a benefit, especially in older adults. We know optimal nutrition is so important to brain health, and many older adults may have a deficiency in one or more micronutrients or may not have a really good diet, high-quality diet. And some of these supplements may be a complement, but we always emphasize that no dietary supplement will ever be a substitute for healthy diet or healthy lifestyle. So the priority, the focus really needs to be on diet and lifestyle. But we should pursue, you know, diet intervention studies, looking at randomized trials at whether there are benefits of some of these dietary supplements, some of these other interventions in slowing age-related memory loss and cognitive decline. The problem is there are so many dietary supplements on the market, aisle after aisle after aisle, $50 billion industry in the U.S., and almost all of those supplements are untested and not shown to have a clear benefit, right? And even concern about risk, because they haven't been clearly tested for safety either. These supplements that we've tested for many years were very safe over the long-term follow-up and showed some benefits that we want to follow up on. In 2018, your study published in the New England Journal of Medicine on Vitamin D Supplementation and Prevention of Cancer and Cardiovascular Disease aimed to clarify whether vitamin D supplementation resulted in a lower incidence of invasive cancer or cardiovascular events. What did you find? We actually had some very complex results from the vitamin D and omega-3 trial or VITAL. What we found was that we tend to need only small to moderate amounts of vitamin D. And most people in the U.S. population, through diet, fortified foods, we have a fortified food supply in the U.S. and from sunshine, ultraviolet, B-lite, from which we can synthesize vitamin D in the skin, really are not benefiting from supplementation, not only in our trial, but also in many other randomized trials that have provided surprising results. But we did see a few signals for benefit from this additional vitamin D supplementation that we want to pursue, including that vitamin D reduced advanced cancers, cancers that were metastatic or fatal, that there may be an effect of vitamin D on the tumor biology, making tumor cells less invasive, less likely to be metastasizing. We also saw some effects of vitamin D. This was a dose of 2,000 IUs a day on reducing autoimmune diseases, like rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, psoriasis, some of these conditions which may be related to a role of vitamin D in tamping down inflammation and lowering some of the inflammatory biomarkers. But we actually did not see a widespread, you know, benefit for every chronic disease. We didn't see clear benefit for cardiovascular disease or many other outcomes, but it was limited to a few outcomes. And these are very exciting signals that we want to follow up on further. Yes, I think it is exciting because it would be utterly shocking if one intervention affected everything. So you've identified some strong candidates. Exactly, exactly. But, you know, surprisingly, many people do expect that something like vitamin D or omega-3s, which we also tested in vital, will be a panacea and a cure-all for everything. And, you know, they're surprised that certain outcomes were not affected. But it is logical and expected that there would be more targeted benefits and that those maybe who have lower nutrient status would benefit or those with certain risk factors would benefit, and that it would be more of a precision nutrition kind of approach rather than, you know, that would make sense rather than just every one-size-fits-all approach expecting that a single dose is going to benefit everyone for every condition. And that certainly wasn't the case in the vitamin D and omega-3 trial. In a way, it's a good thing it wasn't the case because it would seem very unusual. Yeah. Thinking about this study and continuing to talk about it, a subgroup analysis raised the possibility of differential effects on cancer incidence connected to BMI. I'm no fan of BMI, but it is convenient. So could you share a little bit about what was learned in terms of the subgroup analysis and BMI? Yes. These were really intriguing findings in vital that those who had the category of healthy weight or normal weight, body mass index less than 25, did seem to have many more benefits from vitamin D supplementation than those with the higher categories of BMI. And in fact, even for our primary endpoint, which was total cancer incidence, we saw a significant 24% reduction among the group with normal weights, BMI less than 25, but no reduction in the other groups. And for breast cancer death, we saw more than a 40% reduction in risk in that healthy weight group. So we also saw almost a 40% reduction in autoimmune diseases, and many other outcomes were favorably affected in the group with the healthy weights. And this may be because with obesity, there's a systemic inflammation going on. There may be factors that interfere with the bioactivity of vitamin D, its effect on its receptor, on the vitamin D receptor. We are really drilling down deeply to try to understand these differences by BMI, but it does not seem to be totally a dose-related effect. Vitamin D is sequestered in the fat tissue. So you might think, oh, with higher BMI, you may just need twice the dose or a higher dose. But even the randomized trials testing very high doses of vitamin D, such as 4,000 IUs a day, have found a similar difference between those who have a BMI that is lower versus those with higher BMI. And the higher BMI group did not seem to benefit, for example, for prevention of type 2 diabetes. They did not benefit in the diabetes prevention D2 trial, looking at prevention of type 2 diabetes. Even with the 4,000 IUs a day, if they had a high BMI, they didn't benefit with a lower BMI. And there the cut point was 30. They did benefit. So I think we need to understand this better and see if there's a way to address this modifying effect a body mass index so that everyone, regardless of BMI or adiposity level, can benefit from vitamin D supplementation for the roles that it does have. We would want this to be available to everyone, and maybe it requires using a metabolized form of vitamin D that can bypass whatever obstacles are occurring with, let's say, higher systemic inflammation or higher adiposity levels. But we're trying to understand this better and hope over the coming years that we'll have many more insights into these findings. Yeah, that's super interesting. And I wonder if this data was looked at with respect to body composition instead of BMI, whether the result would be the same or it might even be stronger and more explanatory. It's a good question, Ken. And we did look at it by body composition because in 1,000 participants in the clinic sub-cohort, subgroup that has very detailed examinations and analyses done, we had the DEXA body composition measurements, and we saw even stronger associations when we looked at it by fat mass and visceral and, you know, really getting a sense of the body composition and the adiposity level. So this does seem to be related to adiposity. Unfortunately, we don't have DEXA in all 25,000 participants in the studies. We have to rely more on a BMI measure. But we are really drilling down more deeply in the subset with body composition measurements. I'm glad you are because it might help you really tease it apart. You know, there are people like me that are borderline obese by BMI, but aren't actually obese. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. There can be a very big difference. And in many people, BMI is not a good indicator of adiposity. So as we wrap up the interview, we're curious, what would you change about the way women's health is taught and studied when it comes to perimenopause, menopause, and postmenopause? Well, it's seriously neglected and understudied. It's not even in many medical school curricula and in training programs for interns, residents, and fellows. So it really needs to be incorporated. I think an increasing number of schools are doing that. There have been some improvements at Harvard Medical School as well. And it needs to be on the examinations also, because often that's what drives, you know, what ends up being on the tests is what really drives the curriculum. They're closely interrelated. So I think we need a lot more attention to this. We need a lot more CME courses, as well as, you know, incorporation of this training into the basic curriculum in medical school and the graduate training. And then what is coming up next for you and your team in terms of research questions? And the second question to that is, what answers do you think we will have for Gen X women, millennials, and Gen Zers that we don't yet have? It's a great question, Dawn. I think we will hopefully have many more answers for coming generations of women. First, I think we do need a large-scale randomized trial of estradiol, transdermal estradiol, micronized progesterone. The formulations of hormone therapy more commonly being used now, I think we need to understand the benefit-risk ratio. So that's information that I hope we will have before long for women of future generations. Also, what I was mentioning before about healthy aging and the role of social determinants of health, individual and community-based factors, stress, anxiety, depression. We need so much more research on these topics. I think this will be highly relevant to younger generations to have more research in these areas and really be able to guide some of the interventions and behaviors, even something like understanding better the role of social media, the role of the community. It can play such a positive role, but then, again, in some circumstances, it can really increase the stress that people are feeling. And I think with really good, rigorous research in these areas on healthy aging and, again, the social determinants of health, community and individual factors, we'll really be able to move the needle quite a bit for future generations. I certainly hope so. Joanne, we know you have a plane to catch, and we are grateful for the time you've been able to give us. Before we close, though, I wonder, given how busy you are, what do you enjoy doing in your spare time, if you have any spare time? I don't have a lot of spare time, but I do have to say that what I enjoy most is spending time with my family, my husband and my three children. I am about to catch a plane to visit with two of my children in San Francisco and see my new grandson for the first time. Wow. So I am about to get on a plane soon. And I also really enjoy being physically active, hiking, being outdoors, reading, travel, all of these things I enjoy. But I will admit my schedule is very busy, probably busier than I would recommend for most people if I were giving them advice for good health. But hopefully things will get better before long. Well, that'd be wonderful. And enjoy your trip to San Francisco. And it'd be very exciting, I'm sure, to meet a new grandchild. Well, thank you so much. It was great talking with both of you, Dawn and Ken. Thank you so much for joining us today. It's been a fantastic conversation. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. So, Ken, I really enjoyed the time that we had the chance to spend with Joanne Manson. Her work is so important to women's health and to public health in general. Yes, Dawn, I agree. Joanne's work has been shining a much-needed light on women's health for decades. And we will certainly stay tuned to see what more she and her team are able to learn. We can't wait. So, if you enjoyed this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the STEM Talk webpage where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes at STEMtalk.us. This is Dawn Cornegas signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on STEM Talk. Thank you for listening to STEM Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So, please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, STEMtalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview. Thank you. Thank you. You