 Welcome to STEM Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hello, I am your host, Dr. Tommy Wood, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is the man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's founder and chairman of the double secret selection committee that selects all of the guests who appear on STEM Talk. Hi, Tommy. Great to be here. Thanks so much for inviting me to co-host today's interview. For our listeners who aren't familiar with Tommy, but I can't imagine who that would be. He's a visiting scientist here at IHMC and an associate professor of pediatrics and neuroscience at the University of Washington, where he focuses on brain health across the lifespan. He has been our guest several times on STEM Talk, and we will have links to those interviews in our show notes for today's episode. Today, we have Dr. Carl Herup, a neurobiologist known for his investigations of the aging brain, including the role that DNA damage and non-coding genetic variants have in Alzheimer's disease. After more than a century of research, the underlying cause of Alzheimer's remains a mystery. For the past few decades, the leading theory has been the amyloid cascade hypothesis, which proposes that abnormal amyloid plaques in the brain are the central cause of the disease. Today, we talk to Carl about his lab and research, as well as his view that the amyloid cascade hypothesis is not only flawed, but could be misdirecting research for a cure of Alzheimer's. A professor of neurobiology and an investigator at the Alzheimer's disease research center at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Herup is the author of How Not to Study a Disease, the Story of Alzheimer's. But before we get to our interview with Carl, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to STEM Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the wittiest and most lavishly praise-filled reviews to read on STEM Talk. If you hear your review read on STEM Talk, just contact us at stemtalk at IHMC.us to claim your official STEM Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review comes from longtime listener Cicely. It's titled, Picking Up Steam. The review reads, Just when I think the show couldn't get any better, you'll all find a way to elevate it further. I was particularly fascinated by your recent episode with Dr. Kevin Tracy on the pervasiveness and importance of the vagus nerve, including the groundbreaking research on bioelectrical stimulation for healing. My grandmother suffered from severe rheumatoid arthritis, so severe that she required a rod in her spine with an attached halo that was bolted into her skull. I can't help but wonder how her life might have been transformed today with greater awareness of metabolic health and perhaps even just a minute of that daily vagus nerve stimulation. I also thoroughly enjoyed your interview with Dr. Tansy. His revelations on Alzheimer's were fascinating, and learning about his musical background was a delightful surprise. Next time I hear Dream On by Errol Smith, I'll certainly think of STEM Talk. Thank you, Cicely, and thanks to all our other STEM Talk listeners who have helped STEM Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now on to today's interview with Dr. Carl Harrop. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. Carl, I hear you grew up in Pittsburgh. So what kind of kid were you? Well, that's kind of hard to know. I mean, it's a typical case of self-evaluation. I would say I was a typical nerdy kid, just gravitated toward science as I went through elementary and high school. I was reflecting on this earlier that it was in the era of Sputnik. So I was actually around when the Soviets sent Sputnik 1 up into orbit, and that triggered a huge response from the federal government, and all sorts of enrichment programs were suddenly being tossed at kids in elementary school and high school. And in part, I'm a product of that, as were all of my classmates. And I understand you went to high school with a great group of classmates. I went to high school looking back on it now with some of the smartest people I've ever had the privilege of being around. Truly a remarkable group of folks. Pittsburgh was home to Westinghouse at the time, and many of us, not me, but many of my classmates were children of the Westinghouse engineers and scientists. So it was a pretty smart group of people. And I looked back and realized almost what a gift it was to have that kind of intellectual stimulation when I was growing up. You went to Brandeis University after high school with the idea of becoming a physician. So what happened to change your mind? Well, that's a good question. I did go with the idea of being a physician. I'd already been pretty clear that science was where I wanted to go. And sort of in my family, that meant you were going to go into medicine. And so that seemed logical to me. So I started taking classes in biology, and it fit pretty well. And then in my sophomore year, I took a course in genetics from Chandler Fulton, who just absolutely inspired me. And I just fell in love with the whole concept of genetics and how you encode something as complex as a human being in a tiny little nucleus of a cell. And that was the end of my career in medicine. From that point on, was a dyed-in-the-wool basic researcher. I can certainly see how that would take place. Would have worked for me, too. I hear, though, that your father wasn't particularly thrilled with your decision to abandon medical school. Oh, no, he was furious. I mean, it was... In fact, I think that might have been one of the biggest arguments I ever had with my dad. And, of course, I made it worse by applying to medical schools and graduate schools and getting into both. And that made him even more angry when I chose graduate school. I think he thought I would be financially destitute for the rest of my life by choosing something as non-remunerative as an academic career. That's such a nice way to say it. Yeah. I'm doing my best to respect his memory. That was actually funny because it was the opposite for me. My dad is a hardcore scientist, and he was very disappointed when I decided to go to medical school. As you mentioned, you took a genetics class in your sophomore year. This is the late 1960s, when researchers were just beginning to unravel the structure of DNA and its functions. You've kind of alluded to this, but maybe you can tell us about why this was such an exciting time to be learning about this emerging field. Well, it was thrilling. And I look back on it now, those years seemed so primitive. But at that time, it was cutting edge and just thrilling. The genetics that I studied at my sophomore year, the one that caught my interest, this was still how you do male times female transmission of traits. The idea that a nucleotide code in a double helix of a long polymer might actually have the explanation of where those traits came from was just absolutely exciting. But it was the early days. I mean, I was around when Watson and Crick announced their discovery in the Nature paper. I guess I was still in elementary school at the time, but it was still hot news when I was in college. And one of the professors in the biology department was Dr. Kellner. And he was famous for the Kellner hypothesis, which proposed that the nucleotides in the nucleus of the cell were a random assortment of nucleotides in a long polymer that must have some structural purpose that he didn't know. But the whole idea that those were random, I mean, this was still a viable hypothesis when I started school. So then what prompted you to travel from the East Coast to the West Coast to work on a PhD in neuroscience? It was kind of random, almost an accident. I applied to several graduate programs out of Brandeis, got into several, both on the East Coast and the West Coast. But a good buddy of mine who's a year ahead of me in biology, Brandeis, ended up at Stanford. I went out to visit him while I was looking at schools and just made a decision almost on a personal level. Choosing my advisor was also a bit random. I basically walked into the laboratory of Eric Schuder and caught him, which now that I know what his travel schedule used to be like was kind of an amazing feat. And we talked for a while and he said, yeah, if you'd like, it would be fun to have you in the group. So I applied and the graduate school put me on the waiting list because I guess there were others. I mean, Stanford biochemistry and it was by neuro and biobehavioral sciences at the time. It was pretty high profile stuff. There were a bunch of Nobel laureates kind of wandering around the halls. And Eric, God bless him, pulled my application out of the whole pile and said, no, no, no, I'd like this guy to come work for me. So I guess that almost counts as an accident. A nice accident. A very nice accident. Turned out to be a great graduate program. And following up on that, your first postdoc was at Children's Hospital, as I understand it, in neurogenetics. Tell us how that came about. Well, that was also an accident. Although there's a message here, I think, for young students. So I did my graduate work in receptor binding isotherms. I worked on the neuro growth factor receptor and its enzymatic properties, kinetic properties. But I've always been broadly interested. And if you'll recall, my entree into science was through a genetics course. So on a lark, I went to this seminar that was given by Richard Sidman on the neurological mutants of the mouse. And this is the early days when he was promoting the idea that you could use genetics of mice to study behavior as profitably as you could to study skin color and tail morphology. And I remember going to his lecture and listening to talk about Reeler and Staggerer, all these funny names for mice that couldn't walk right. And the idea of getting back into genetics just blew me away. So rather than pursue postdoctoral work in biochemistry, which I think was what Eric Schuder had sort of imagined I would be doing, I completely changed fields and went into developmental neurogenetics. Hmm. It's fortunate that you had a postdoc advisor like him that would allow you the freedom to explore and to launch into a new area. Yeah. Continuing on our accidental theme, was it also an accident that led you to Switzerland for a second postdoc? That was a little less of an accident, although I guess looking back, it was a bit reckless. I had always admired Hans Ternan, who was in Basel, Switzerland at the time at the Biosentrum. But that was a feeling I had based on my graduate work. So going to Switzerland actually left neurogenetics and went back to receptor-binding isotherms. And I did a wonderful but short postdoc with Ternan and enjoyed it thoroughly, both scientifically and personally for the opportunity to live in a foreign country. But I think my heart had been totally captured by the genetic aspects of my postdoc. So that postdoc at the Biosentrum was the last time I actually did biochemistry. Hmm. You know, going overseas for a postdoc is somewhat common these days, but not at all in the 70s. Not at all? No, I don't remember any of my friends that did postdocs going overseas. Could you tell us about that? I mean, you told us about the experience you had. It had to be, you called it kind of reckless. I mean, you just packed up and went off to Switzerland. I look back on it, and it's not the only time in my life that I have, I just shake my head and say, if one of my kids ever did this, I'm not sure what I would say. But it just seemed like a wonderful opportunity. I saw, you know, the intellectual vitality of Hans Ternan. I saw the potential to do good work. And all of the other trappings of the move just sort of never crossed my mind as being significant. So, of course, in retrospect, I think I probably should have pondered that a bit more carefully, especially because, as you point out in those days, it was not real usual to end up going abroad for a postdoc. It was the common wisdom was that that was a one-way ticket. Once you got overseas, you'd never be able to interview for your job back in the United States. This was in the days before Zoom and Internet. So you would literally have to come back and physically appear at these various places. And if someone had caught me, they probably would have advised me strongly not to do this. But I'm glad I did. Well, you seem to have benefited by the combination of preparation and the willingness to explore opportunities that present. And that's kind of a great combination. You know, we all are presented with opportunities, but we often don't see them or we're not prepared to fully benefit from them. I would agree with that. You know, I'm not sure I would recommend my life trajectory to anyone. But what I would recommend is that willingness to be open to new ideas and to change. It's scary. But the one thing I'm most proud about is that I just I would always squelch that fear and just look at the opportunity and run with it if I thought it would advance either my career or my personal growth. And then you did successfully come back. You came back to the US. Tell us about your faculty appointment at Yale. So that was really seriously got me back into the genetics that, as I said, was what dragged me into science to begin with. I went from back from doing receptor binding isotherms again to a department of human genetics. And it was a very exciting time to be in human genetics. It was the first time we could even really think about human genetics in a serious way. We were just starting to be able to do somatic cell genetics. So we would be able to get skin fibroblasts from living people and work with their genetic material. But it was while I was at Yale that the whole concept of restriction fragment length polymorphisms as tools for mapping came into the fore. And you could actually begin to map the human genome, not in the sense that we think of it today, nucleotide by nucleotide, but region by region. And this was just a thrilling time to be in genetics. I mean, but just to give you a little perspective on how long ago this was, I remember sitting in one of my first seminars as a young assistant professor and listening to a speaker whose name, of course, I've now forgotten, talk about how once the DNA encoded RNA, the RNA polymer was actually spliced. And what ended up being translated into the cytoplasm was not even the whole message. And I remember thinking at the time, for God's sakes, my entire graduate education was wasted on me. You know, of course, fast forward and it's major regulatory principle of genetics and hugely important. But it just gives you a flavor for what an exciting time it was to be in human genetics. So as you built on that work after Yale, you had several faculty appointments, including a seven year stint in Hong Kong. I'm going to guess that this came about by accident. But maybe you could tell us a little bit about that journey. Yeah, well, Hong Kong was a total accident. Full disclosure, I came up for tenure after 10 years at Yale and was denied. That's, of course, expected at that time. Yale was taking about one in 10 of the junior faculty they hired to promote up to tenure. So I didn't make that cut. I went up to Boston for four years to be in a program of developmental neurobiology. And that was the first time I entered a leadership position. So it was a small group. There was only five or four or five of us. But I was the director and it began to hone my skills as an administrator. But then an opportunity came to move to the neuroscience department at Case Western Reserve University. And that had been a group that I'd been on my radar for a long time. And I just jumped at that chance. Again, this one was not quite so reckless, but it does not seem to be a terrific advertisement to be changing jobs after only four years. But the Case job, once again, proved the wisdom of being ready for change because that was one of the most productive periods of my professional career and certainly one of the most enjoyable. And then from there, I moved to Rutgers University in Piscataway, New Jersey. And that was because, as my friend always says, my chairman gene turned on and I was blocked from any opportunity to take a leadership role in Cleveland. And Rutgers had offered me the chair of cell biology and neuroscience out there. So I jumped at that and had a wonderful six years there. And when I went there, I remember already thinking that now, of course, I don't think of it this way, but that I thought I was pretty advanced in my career for them to be thinking about me as a chair. But I said, OK, I'll go. And I'm sure that they'll take me out of Rutgers in a box. And then one day I got an email from a woman that I'd been collaborating with, not actually collaborating, it's the wrong word. We were colleagues and interested in the same protein, CDK5. And she was at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in Hong Kong. And we were just going back and forth about science. And at the end of one of her emails, she put a PS, which is basically, you wouldn't be interested in being the head of life science here, would you? And I've told this story many times. It is the case that I probably should have said, oh, that's very flattering, but no, thank you. And instead, the planets were aligned differently that day. And I sent her back a note. Well, how about if I come do a visit? And so I flew over, did a visit, loved the location, loved the excitement of being in a relatively new university. It was less than 25 years old when I got there. And I remember driving into work at Rutgers one day, sort of weighing the pros and cons. And I made a list of pros and cons. And it was pretty well balanced, slightly more cons. And I still remember the curve in the drive up to the lab where I just got goosebumps. I said, you know what? I want to go to Hong Kong. And the rest is history. And that is both random, reckless, and just a fabulous professional decision. I do still look back on the time in Hong Kong as one of the most professionally stimulating times. It is a small university. And because of that, I had good friends who were chemists and physicists and engineers and computer scientists. And I even would occasionally chat with the dean of the business school. And that's a really fertile intellectual environment that I find incredibly stimulating and thoroughly enjoyable. Tommy, that sounds like someplace we know. Yeah. You mentioned briefly earlier that you wouldn't necessarily recommend your career trajectory to anybody. But listening to you talk about it and all these different experiences and the different groups of people you got to interact with, I really wonder if this is a feature of your career and not a bug. And it allows you to approach problems in the way that you do, particularly in the field of Alzheimer's research, which we get to now in your career, where you move back to your hometown in 2019 to become a professor of neurobiology at the University of Pittsburgh and co-investigator at the university's Alzheimer's disease research center, which is one of the nation's leading institutes specializing in Alzheimer's disease and related disorders. So what prompted this move back and also sort of starting to move into the Alzheimer's field? So the move to Alzheimer's had started in Cleveland. So I was pretty well established as an Alzheimer's researcher by then. The move to Pittsburgh was not so much random, but the timing was random. I had gone to Hong Kong in my early 60s, and they were unable to award me tenure because they had mandatory retirement age. So they awarded me a, basically they awarded me a tenure contract. And that was an agreeable to me. I felt that even if I were still intellectually active, that it was time for me to step aside and let younger people carry this ball forward, that I'd continue to write, I'd hope to be able to continue to teach, but the 10 years was enough. But of course, Pittsburgh was my home. My folks were still here. My cousins and other family members were still here. A lot of my high school buddies were still here. So I came back regularly for visits and spend time. And one of the people I would irregularly get in together with was Peter Strick, who's the chair of neurobiology here at the University of Pittsburgh. And I remember one fateful morning, it would have been probably 2017 or 18. Anyways, I'm still four years from the end of my Hong Kong contract. And Peter and I had breakfast together. And I walked, as we were walking out, I said, Peter, I want to plant a seed. I'm going to be coming back from Hong Kong in about four years. Pittsburgh's my home. I'm thinking I'm just going to retire here. But I'm still thinking I may be wanting to remain intellectually active. And I want you to think about helping me get an adjunct appointment at Pitt so that I can keep an email address, keep library privileges. And Peter did not miss a beat. He said, you want to laugh? And I said, Peter, you're not listening to me. I'm old. I'm a bad investment. And I don't think I can start a laboratory from scratch again. And he said, nah, you can do it. And well, I mean, okay. So you know how that story ends. Here I am. Well, he was right. Well, he won the argument anyways. He was right on both counts. So now that you had the lab, can you tell us about the lab? You know, it focuses on the biology of neural degeneration. But each lab is sort of different and unique and has a unique culture. Tell us a little about the lab. Well, we'll get into why this particular focus, I'm sure, in a minute. But for now, I'm fascinated by this wonderful, large, one-pass transmembrane protein known as the amyloid precursor protein. And the reason it's called that we'll get into later. But it's a fascinating protein that has all sorts of interesting actions in the nervous system. And right now, if I had to identify a common thread that holds all of my work together, it's an interest in the many, many functions of that protein. So we look at it from the standpoint of neuronal activity because it modulates the position of the axon initial segment, which directly alters the firing probability of a neuron. We look at it from the standpoint of DNA damage. We have a new line of research, not published yet, but very exciting to me that it's tied closely to genomic integrity. And that resonates with me because genomic integrity is such a big part of aging. And then finally, I've developed an interest in myelin and in more specifically in the cells that create myelin in the central nervous system known as oligodendrocytes. And they too have an important relationship to the amyloid precursor protein that I'm just fascinated by. So that's where my lab is right now. Really interesting. And you're right. We'll come back to some of those topics. But let me back up just a bit. Was there a specific moment or something that happened or some incident that convinced you to focus your research and career so strongly at this point on Alzheimer's? So that goes back to the early 90s when I went from the Shriver Center in Boston to Cleveland. I'd been working in developmental genetics, but I'd focused all that work on regulation of cell death, which during development is actually a positive force. It sculpts the nervous system and helps refine its shape and balance. And I remember as I would interact with people who studied Alzheimer's and neurodegeneration in general, I remember thinking that these diseases of aging smell a lot to me like developmental disorders that I'm already studying. And I think I would like to take my developmental perspective on cell death and on the nervous system and apply it to the problems of late-onset neurodegenerative diseases. And the thinking was that aging was just development but on a longer time course. Some of that was probably a bit naive, although I can't say that any of it has ever been disproven. But anyways, that was what got me interested. And then with the move to Cleveland, the position that was actually open was in the Alzheimer's Center. And I said, well, put your money where your mouth is. If this is what you think is driving the disease, go for it. So I did. And I still feel that my perspective on Alzheimer's is largely that of a developmental biologist. I think that makes a lot of sense, at least partly because you only get one brain and it developed at one point. And that trajectory of cognitive function starts during development and then essentially continues until it starts to decline later in life. So they have to be connected in some way. So I would agree. I mean, when I teach students, I'll do a lecture on aging, which is one of my favorite lectures because I love to look at it just as a problem of biology. And I put up faces. Actually, I do it in the book for a different reason. But I put up faces of a one-year-old, a five-year-old, a 10-year-old, 20, 40, and 60-year-old. And I said, OK, can you see which age matches with which face? And of course, everybody can. But what I do when I'm teaching aging is I said, all right, well, think about this. When did development stop? And of course, my point being, if development is change over time, then it looks from these pictures that there's change continues throughout the human lifespan. And then I turn it around and say, OK, from that perspective, when did aging begin? And that's my way of communicating that we really are talking about change over time, whether we're talking about embryogenesis and the rising up of the neural folds or aging and the loss of hippocampal neurons during hippocampal sclerosis. So then in that last area, let's talk about your book, How Not to Study a Disease, The Story of Alzheimer's. In this book, you open by talking about the fact that you interviewed a lot of experts and colleagues and you asked each one, tell me in your own words, what is Alzheimer's disease? What did you learn from this process? I learned that my deepest fears about the field were thoroughly justified. Because I got a different answer from everyone I spoke with. And what I realized from that very simple exercise was that Alzheimer's disease meant different things to different people, which means we really didn't have a good definition for what Alzheimer's disease was. And to me, that is the major problem holding the field back right now. So the first point, which has to be reiterated, is that there isn't a single accepted definition of Alzheimer's disease still. Can you tell us a bit more about why you think this is such a critical problem? Well, it has many good reasons and many bad reasons. So some of the good reasons are that this is an extraordinarily complicated disease. It is years in the making. The underlying biology is exceptionally difficult to tease apart. At least in Carl world, it is a collaborative collapse of just about every cell type in the brain and most likely throughout the body. So that's a good reason. It's a hard problem to start with. So the field may be, you know, given a mulligan or two to try and get it right. The bad reasons are that too many people have tried to make it a simple problem when it just isn't. And in making it simple, they assume or they predict or they hope that there is a single pathway that leads to this disease. And that, of course, I suspect we'll get into it more later. But this fascination with this tiny waxy peptide called beta amyloid is very distracting. It's very compelling, but it's very distracting. So what is your working definition of Alzheimer's? Do you have one that you're comfortable with? My definition is a symptomatic definition, and I defer to my clinicians to get the language exactly right. But it's a neurodegenerative disease that affects all regions of the brain. Its most prominent early manifestations and prominent early symptoms are the inability to easily form new short-term memories and consolidate them into long-term memories. It develops in different ways in different people. There are language problems and spatial orientation problems. Behavioral problems begin to manifest. And over the course of the disease, which is long and relentless, the individual completely loses their autonomy. At the end stages of the disease, people are bedridden, immobile, uncommunicative, and ultimately death results. So it is a long process. It's an irreversible process. And its biology remains still somewhat of a mystery. You begin your book writing about a woman named Dorothy. She was barely five feet tall and had a lively personality. She was quite active well into her 80s. She worked on crossword puzzles in the mornings and basically was doing everything right in terms of taking good care of herself. Then gradually, Alzheimer's sort of snuck up on her. Can you talk about Dorothy and why you decided to open the book with her story? Well, in many ways, Dorothy's story is a typical story of Alzheimer's. It progresses from a loss of short-term memory to more and more serious cognitive decline to the physical abnormalities that begin to affect a person. But there are many things about her story that are frankly unusual and would not qualify Dorothy's case to be presented in a review of Alzheimer's disease. For one, it was very late in life when the memory problems began. Typically, these are first detectable in the 70s, 70 years of life. Dorothy was well into her 80s. She had a few behavioral symptoms, but the aggression that often accompanies Alzheimer's was not a problem for her. There were many sort of tweaks and differences. And I found it compelling to use her as an example because it allowed me to emphasize what a complex disease this is and how each case of Alzheimer's is personal. It's that no one person travels the disease course in the same way. And I think that's true no matter whose biological mechanism you accept. And at the end of the day, I realized as I was writing the book that this heterogeneity, this uncertainty about what Alzheimer's was, the failure of the field's attempt to define it, made Dorothy a very compelling exemplar of both what was the disease and also how little we knew about it. So at the end of the day, I think that one woman captures my sense of both awe and wonder, but also frustration about the field very, very well. You know, a guy who's been on STEM Talk previously, a really wonderful person, a fabulous Parkinson's researcher, Michael Okun. He loves to say, just as you did, he loves to say, if you've seen one case of Parkinson's, you've seen one case of Parkinson's. Yes, that's exactly right. It's kind of in the same spirit of what you were saying. Yeah. I mean, this is not published. I was going to say the exact same phrase. You stole that from me. It's not really publishable, but over the years I've discovered, at least in my laboratory, the brain is very complicated. You found that out. I did. I haven't published it yet, so please, you know, let's just keep it amongst the three of us. It'll be hush-hush. Okay, thank you. I think before we delve further into the biology and some of the history of the field, it's probably useful to set some terminology. So could you start by just telling us the difference between Alzheimer's disease and dementia more broadly? Well, I've already given you the hint that I think Alzheimer's is very hard to define anyways. Yeah. But I and everyone else in the field would characterize Alzheimer's as a type of dementia. So dementia is the larger, sort of more inclusive term, kind of like cancer is a large inclusive term for many types of cellular problems. Depending on how you define Alzheimer's, it is the most common form of late life dementia, but there are certainly others, Lewy body disease, progressive supernuclear palsy, vascular dementia. There are many kinds of conditions that lead to a dementing illness, a loss of mind, loss of mental function, and again, in late life. So Alzheimer's is one of those. And even though it's not what Alzheimer originally first described, nowadays we say that Alzheimer's typically doesn't start until someone is beyond the age of 65, and it's quite rare for it to start before then. But when it happens, it's a special form of the disease known as early onset Alzheimer's, which is quite aggressive and usually runs in families. So can you now tell us how do we differentiate between early onset and late onset Alzheimer's disease? We use that age of 65 as the marker, but like all things in biology, it's a fuzzy line, not a sharp one. If a dementia sets in before the age of 65 that has the clinical presentation, clinical characteristics of Alzheimer's, we call it early Alzheimer's. If it comes after that, we call it sporadic, which as I say in the book is science speak for we have no idea what's going on. How does one clinically differentiate between something like vascular dementia in an older person and Alzheimer's? It's very hard. And we go with symptoms like where do the first deficits first appear? Is it really just short-term memory loss? Are there hallucinations involved? Are there any motor signs involved? Are there aggressive behaviors involved? Is sleep disrupted? Are there all of these things? There is a clinical picture that a trained neurologist, a geriatrician would be able to identify as a typical case of Alzheimer's. But it's worth noting that you, as we look for a biological basis and go in to the brain, either post-mortem or with pet ligands during life, and there's almost no such thing as pure Alzheimer's. It's very, it's not vanishingly rare, but it is really uncommon. And rather the bottom line is that these things go on together. So I think I cite the numbers in my book, but almost three quarters of the cases that are clinically diagnosed as Alzheimer's disease, if you look pathologically, three quarters of them have got strong evidence of vascular engagement so that there were vascular problems that could well have contributed symptoms to the person's dementia. Thank you for that explanation. You know, and we all know people who have had Alzheimer's and do have it as well as vascular dementia. And in some cases, I wondered, and you give a wonderful explanation, if the diagnosis was as crisp as it's often said to be. You know, in two of these cases, people were APOE44s and were diagnosed as vascular dementia. And I was just wondering if they might be suffering from elements of both. And we come back to Dorothy and why she's such an exemplar of the field, of the situation. Indeed. STEMTalk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, locomotion, healthspan, resilience, and performance. Your decision to use how not to study a disease as the title really sets the tone for the book and highlights how so many assumptions about the causes of Alzheimer's may have misdirected research in some degree into the disease. Could you talk about how this misdirection could have happened and what the implications are? I think at root, as I said before, the problems stem from trying to make a complicated disease simple. I think that's the underlying issue at a more practical or superficial level. The problem goes back to the very first description of the disease itself by the guy whose name is on the disease, Alois Alzheimer's. He and his boss were both huge partisans of the idea that the structure of the brain dictated its function. And without going into the details, when he had a single case of an early-onset dementia and then was able, after the woman passed away, to examine her brain and found unusual deposits that he was unfamiliar with in the brain of this woman, he made the very logical conclusion that I don't normally see these deposits in the brain. I don't normally see this aggressive dementia. And the two are correlated. And so I propose that it is these abnormal structures that lead to the abnormal behavior. And that set the snowball rolling, which is still thundering down the hill. That's a great way to say it. In your book, you tell the full story of the snowball as it continued to gather mass and speed. And it does begin back with Alzheimer and his mentor, Emil Krappelin. And some recent retellings of this story suggest that even Alzheimer wasn't convinced that the small collection of cases that he had actually fit one single diagnosis. But Krappelin sort of put them together and named a condition after Alzheimer in a book that he was writing. And you say that this was the first of three distinct events that sort of elevated Alzheimer's disease and the amyloid cascade hypothesis to the prominence it holds today. So maybe you can tell us about the trajectory of that history of the disease. Yeah, I call them the three inflations. So Alzheimer and Krappelin inflated a single case study into an entire disease. And this was a great hypothesis. But as I point out in the book, putting it in a textbook, which is what Krappelin did, sort of puts the imprimatur on it of case closed, which was inappropriate at the time and turns out probably is still inappropriate. The second inflation, though, then the much more destructive one came around the time that the National Institute on Aging was being birthed in the United States. And here, a series of hypotheses were put forward that said, you know, the early onset form of dementia with all of these plaques and tangles that Alzheimer described looks an awful lot like the later onset sporadic cases that we're seeing, because these cases also have the abnormal deposits in the brains. And therefore, it must be that this is the same disease, just having a different age of onset for whatever reason. This was before we actually had genes. And again, as a hypothesis, it's credible. It's worthy of experimentation. It was controversial at the time. It remains controversial to this day, but it's stuck. And from that time forward, if you had dementia and these abnormal deposits in the brain, the plaques and the tangles, you had Alzheimer's disease. And that inflated the definition in a really substantial and very unproductive way, because we were still just dealing with correlation. The plaques and tangles were correlated with dementia. But even then, people were skeptical. They were finding other structural abnormalities in the brain. There were myelin abnormalities. There were vesicular abnormalities with lysosomes. And there was resistance to the idea. But the, I don't know what to call them, the cognoscente of the time persisted and said, no, it is these abnormal deposits that is the disease. Therefore, we're dealing with the same disease. And the third inflation is by far the most reprehensible. I mean, I can't think of a strong enough word to describe it. But it's a series of papers developed over the past decade or so that says, well, actually, the deposits are the disease. And we don't need to care about whether the person has the symptoms that we use to clinically define Alzheimer's. If they have these deposits, they have Alzheimer's. And for those fortunate people who have those deposits but are clinically unaffected, they actually have the disease. They're just not showing symptoms yet. And this, it both brings the fur up on my back and makes me pull the hair out of my head. So what I need to do is pull the hair off my back and put it on my head, take care of my male pattern baldness. But no, it literally drives me crazy. I think this makes Alzheimer's disease the only disease where the diagnosis can be based purely on the finding of a scan or something else and having almost nothing to do with the symptoms or the trajectory or the history of the patient itself. I don't think that is necessarily true. It would be unusual. You know, if we find metastatic cells in the blood of a leukemia patient, that is direct evidence that this person has leukemia. I'm grasping for straws. But what I'm trying to say is that it isn't that we couldn't have a biological marker that told us about an impending disease process. But for that marker to be valuable, we have to know with certainty that there is biology backing up that hypothetical pathway. And I go to great lengths in the book trying to outline how every test that we put on this hypothesis fails. So yes, we have a biomarker. Yes, it's correlated to some extent, I would say not really a very serious extent, with the presence of dementia. But there's no biological pathway that links those deposits to the particular set of symptoms that we call Alzheimer's or any other form of dementia. And so the marker then is virtually worthless. So this biological pathway you're talking about that doesn't exist, this is rooted in what is called the amyloid cascade hypothesis. It starts with something you mentioned earlier, the amyloid precursor protein. Can you tell us a little bit about what is supposedly happening in this pathway that's driving the disease? And then we could talk about more how the tests and hypotheses come from this idea and how they stand up to the current line of evidence. That's a great question. I think for our listeners, it's going to be important to tie those threads back together. So Alzheimer discovered these abnormal deposits. And one of the deposits were these, what he called neurofibrillary tangles inside of neurons. They were what's called argophilic, which means they took up silver and could be stained. But in addition, he found what he called these waxy deposits that were an amyloid deposit, which also took up the silver stain and were also abnormal. So you fast forward in the 1980s and a couple of biochemists went and purified the plaques out of the brains and using the technology of the day, sequenced, did the amino acid sequence of the protein that they could find in these plaques. And they got a sequence that identified a chain of amino acids. And this was fortuitously right at the time when we were beginning, we'd cracked the genetic code so we could go backwards from the amino acid sequence to hypothesize what the gene sequence was. And then from that proposed sequence, go back into the human genome and find the full length gene and then protein, which created the plaque peptide. And that led us to the amyloid precursor protein. So that amino acid sequence turned out to be part of a large transmembrane protein, roughly 750 amino acids in length, varies depending on conditions. And about 5% of that protein in the region that spans the membrane, the cellular membrane, is the sequence that matches the peptide constituent of the plaques. So everyone said, aha, here's what happens in Alzheimer's disease. We've got it. You cleave too much of the APP protein, the amyloid precursor protein. There's too much cleavage. You end up with too much of that little fragment, the beta amyloid fragment. That fragment turns out to be sticky and it easily forms aggregates. And the aggregates can be small or they can be as large as a plaque, which is actually almost visible macroscopically. And so that led people to say, okay, well, that makes... Now we have a pathway that we can think of that leads to Alzheimer's. So we have too much APP, we end up with too much of the A-beta peptide. A-beta peptide aggregates and forms plaques. But in doing so, it also triggers downstream events. It triggers the innate immune system. So microglia start responding and contributing to an inflammatory profile. Triggers the deposition of these neurofibrillary tangles. We don't need to get into the chemistry of that. And then all of these things together begin to lead to first neuronal dysfunction and then neuronal death. And that's what leads to dementia. So we have a linear pathway going from the A-beta peptide to aggregates to inflammation, neurofibrillary tangles, neuronal death and dementia. And that linear hypothesis was, in its day, controversial but perfectly plausible and needed to be tested. And that's the hypothesis that I spend almost an entire book trying to say, no matter how many times we test it, it fails. Yes. And in the book and here today, you've cogently argued that the amyloid cascade hypothesis is at the very least limited and potentially of little value. I'll point out, as you know, you're in the minority in this viewpoint. And you argue, and you've mentioned this earlier, that the amyloid cascade hypothesis fails three basic tests that you and your colleagues applied to it. And you mentioned it earlier, but I think it would be helpful to walk through them. So let's do that. Let's start with the first one. In both humans and mice, adding amyloid to healthy brains does not seem to start the amyloid cascade, does it? Not in my book. And so let's actually start with mice, our models that we use to do drug tests and what have you. We have genetically engineered mice dozens of times to produce excess APP, excess amyloid. And we've been reasonably successful at getting mice that normally do not get plaque deposits in their brains. We've been reasonably successful at getting mice to develop amyloid plaques in their brain. And I would argue that not one of these models approaches the clinical complexity of Alzheimer's even a little. If you look in a cage with transgenic mice that are amyloid or that are Alzheimer models, and they're in there with their wild type litter mates, it is virtually impossible to tell who's who. And as I like to say, if you go into a memory care unit, it is instantly obvious who the residents are and who their visiting family members are. And that level of clinical distinction just does not apply to a mice. And I think I say in the book, and if I didn't, I'll say it here. If I sent my graduate student out into the world and said, listen, I want you to prove that beta amyloid has nothing to do with the clinical symptoms of Alzheimer's. And she came back with all of the existing transgenic data in the field. I would pat her on the head and say, good job. But I should add that, okay, we can't do that exact experiment in humans. It's wildly unethical. But we can look at the prevalence of amyloid deposits in the brains of elderly people. And we've done that. And we've done it both retrospectively with neuropathology. But now with the pet ligands, we can even do it prospectively and look while people are alive. And basically, you can have an individual with a significant quantity of amyloid deposits in their brain. And they are cognitively completely intact. And their risk of getting Alzheimer's is slightly elevated, but only a few fold. And it just seems almost, it's a clue, but clinically, it's largely insignificant. So both in human and in mice, you add amyloid to the brain, nothing happens. So then your second test, you talk about the fact that if you remove amyloid from the brains of first mice and then people with Alzheimer's or high levels of amyloid, that doesn't stop the disease process. This point was certainly true when you wrote the book, has become slightly more complicated since then, as we've had multiple anti-amyloid therapies approved by the FDA, such as lacanumab and gantanerumab, with supposedly the promise of slowing Alzheimer's progression. So could you talk us about the history of these anti-amyloid therapies and your thoughts on the more recent drugs? Yeah. So that's a complicated and I would say dark period in our clinical trial history. And let me repeat what you've already said, which I am definitely a minority, a member of the minority in holding this view. But I hold it firmly and proudly. So before adecanumab, we went through over three dozen clinical trials. The treatment in question was aimed at removing amyloid as a way of arresting Alzheimer's disease. And before 2021, every single one of those trials had failed, even though many of them, not all of them, but many of them had successfully reduced the levels of plaque deposits in the brain. And along the way, there was a realization that we could actually develop immunological approaches to reduce plaques so that if antibodies were produced that recognized this A-beta peptide in any stage of aggregation, that those antibodies were able to not just stop new plaques from forming, but actually clear the plaques that already exist in the brain. And lacanumab, denanimab, and adecanumab are the three most recent versions that have, they're engineered antibodies that are given passively. So they're given by infusion. And these antibodies have been hugely successful in reducing the amyloid burden. In the case of, I think it's denanimab, the reduction is almost 80%. I may have those numbers wrong, but all three of them were highly successful in reducing the amyloid burden. So loud hosannas, we've achieved our goal of reducing amyloid in the brain. And therefore, we have had now a successful second test of the amyloid cascade hypothesis. So if you remove the amyloid, you should stop the disease. And in point of fact, that doesn't happen. What happens is that the rate of decline in cognition slows slightly. And it's the slightly part that has caused a huge amount of controversy in the field. One way of looking at it is that relative to the placebo, people on antibody infusions declined roughly 30% more slowly. And that is arithmetically correct. What it ignores is that that 30% difference hides the fact that if you look at the full scale of cognition, that difference is only about 5% of the full scale. And that difference by many, many studies that preceded the 2021 experiments is clinically undetectable. So that you can't tell, a patient cannot tell based on their cognitive performance, whether they have received antibody or received a placebo. And even more troublesome is that nobody on the trial got better. Everybody got worse. It's just that the people on the monoclonals got worse more slowly. So something is going on. I really, and it makes my position so hard to maintain, because I don't want to say that amyloid and these deposits have absolutely zero to do with brain aging, that something is going on, but it isn't Alzheimer's disease. And there is one more way of looking at it, which we just published in an opinion piece in eNeuro, that if you compare the effect of the monoclonal antibodies with the effect of the cholinesterase inhibitors, which have been standard of care for two decades now, and you go back to the clinical trials, both original ones and later ones, the effect of these cholinesterase inhibitors, and we're talking about drugs that, you know, Aricept, Galantamine, the effect of these cholinesterase inhibitors is twice that of the monoclonal antibodies. So the difference between, in the DENANAMAB trial, was 1.4 units on a sum of boxes scale. Dinepezil, which is the cholinesterase inhibitor, the difference was 2.9%, so it's twice as effective in slowing decline. And when you take Dinepezil, people actually get better. So over the first months of the disease, people's MMSE, people's CDRs improve. Now, that's not a permanent improvement, and most people in the field believe it's symptomatic, but it is nonetheless an improvement. People get better and remain better for six months. So we need to step back and say, monoclonal antibodies are at least 100 times as expensive. They come with risk, which I haven't talked about yet, but the risks are not trivial, and they're half as effective. So why? But in my mind, that doesn't pass the grandmother test. And the grandmother test is, would you recommend these drugs to your grandmother? And I would not. No, it does sound like if they fail the granny test. So returning to your three tests of the amyloid cascade hypotheses, in your third test, you found that blocking the formation of amyloid from the amyloid precursor protein does not stop the disease and actually makes both humans and mice sicker. Could you talk a little bit about that? Yeah. So as I said before, the amyloid itself, the beta amyloid, is cut from a larger protein, the amyloid precursor protein, or APP. To do that cut, you need two enzymes, one that cuts just outside the cell membrane, outside the cell. It's a protease known as the beta secretase. And you need a second protease that actually works within the membrane. It's a complex of protein known as the gamma secretase. So you need both cuts to free the beta amyloid peptide and get a plaque. So over the years, people have devised drugs, small molecules that will inhibit both the outside cut, the beta secretase cut, and the intramembrane cut, the gamma secretase cut. So drugs are available that inhibit both. In every trial, those inhibitors made people worse. And by that, I mean that trials were halted because the adverse events and the decline of cognition was clearly exceeding that of the placebo. Now, in my mind, it's not quite as definitive a test as the adding amyloid or removing amyloid, but it certainly is not any argument in favor of the amyloid cascade hypothesis because without those cleavages, you can't make beta amyloid. The problem, though, and the reason it's not quite as definitive is that these proteases, the secretases, also cleave many, many other proteins. The gamma secretase, I believe, has well over 100 substrates that it works on. And when you inhibit the gamma secretase, you really have a very hard time coming up with a specific inhibitor so that it just blocks the cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein. And even though, even small molecules that are purportedly more specific, their effects are still similar. Just to be clear, I'd like to point out that these three failures that you mentioned, you're not arguing against any role for amyloid, just not a causative role in Alzheimer's. That is correct. It may well prove useful as a symptom. We call it a... I don't want to... So biomarker is a loaded term right now in the field. I don't want to call it a biomarker, but it's a symptom and it might end up proving useful from that in that regard. A question you must get all the time is, well, if it's not amyloid, what is it? Oh, look at the weather outside. It's sunny again today. No, it's... Yes, that's a great question. And it's one that I really hate. And I hate it because, I'll be honest with you and with your listeners, the honest answer is I don't know. And it makes it sound like I'm talking out of both sides of my mouth, but let me try and elaborate on why I don't know. So there are two main reasons why I don't know. The one we talked about before, the brain is complicated and Alzheimer's disease is a hugely complicated condition. The other is that research in the field has been so badly skewed towards the central role of amyloid that it has not neglected, but so seriously downplayed the possible involvement of other agencies that we've really been held back from making progress and learning about what is driving this disease. So when I talk about it now, and what I would suggest is that it is a multifactorial disease. It is a combinatorial disease. There may be a role for the disruptive effects of these amyloid deposits. There may be a role for the disruptive effects of the neurofibrillary tangles, but there is also a major problem with inflammation. We talked before about vascular problems, huge contribution to the symptoms of dementia. There may be involvement of infectious agents, viruses and bacteria. There is calcium dysregulation. There's metabolic dysregulation. There's vesicular trafficking problems. We talked about myelin. So in answer to the question, if it is an amyloid, what is it? It may be an unsatisfying answer, but I think the answer is all of the above, that it is an emergent property of the aging brain. It represents the sum of an entire constellation of homeostatic failures. I wonder if you could briefly expand on that idea of emergence as it pertains to the brain, because something that you've also mentioned, particularly related to the amyloid cascade hypothesis, is that we've focused on the single reductionist research model where you try and boil it down to a simple linear problem, whereas the brain just doesn't function like that. And it really, the brain, even consciousness and cognitive function is an emergent phenomenon. So could you talk a little bit about how that may be playing into some of the issues with trying to understand the disease process? Sure. In my mind, it goes back to the basic problem of aging, which is, again, a complex biology that we are only beginning to understand. And in my view, aging is a very heterogeneous process that progresses almost on a cell-by-cell basis. So with time, every cell, the probability of failure of their physiological function increases as repair mechanisms get swamped by the accumulated damage of time. This is going on in every cell in our body, neurons, excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons, vascular endothelial cells, microglial cells of the brain, the oligodendrocytes that make myelin, and the astrocytes, each one of them is undergoing a almost random, but relentless and progressive failure of homeostasis. In this environment, the network properties of the brain, despite their very robust construction, so our brains can handle a huge amount of loss of individual units and still function quite well. But despite that redundancy of function, our network and our properties just start being unable to keep up with the damage. And what we then perceive as dimension emerges from this slow, multicellular failure of aging. The last section in your book, How Not to Study a Disease, is titled, Where Do We Go From Here? You argue that because age is an absolute prerequisite for Alzheimer's, there is no solution to the problem of dementia that doesn't rely heavily on understanding the biology of aging. Much of this was originally posited in your 2010 paper, Reimagining Alzheimer's Disease, an Age-Based Hypothesis. Can you talk about your view that this is going to be hard because aging is probably one of the greatest unsolved mysteries in biology? Well, you just said it all, so there's very little more for me to add. Aging is just an incredible conundrum. We have these very robust homeostatic mechanisms in our cells. They're very good at repairing oxidative damage, protein modification irregularities, taking care of abnormal deposits in the cells, getting rid of failed organelles. Our cells are just masters at self-repair, and chief among them is repairing the nuclear genome, which, of course, is the architect that keeps the blueprints for everything the cell does. With time, for reasons that we truly do not understand, those repair mechanisms fail and damage begins to accumulate. And in my mind, the failure of cognition that we see as dementia of the Alzheimer type or whatever, that dementia is rooted thoroughly in that problem of aging. And it's why young people don't get Alzheimer's. They can't get it. Their cells are still too capable, too competent at repairing themselves. Those mechanisms fail. Now, we could have an entire class on or discussion about why would they fail? What about a 60-year-old neuron suddenly makes it incapable of taking care of itself? I wish I could answer that question, but my hesitation there is symptomatic of the fact that I can't. So it's in that biology of aging that the roots of our dementia lie. Mm-hmm. It's interesting that aging itself gets much less research attention and much less funding than all of the disorders for which it's the greatest risk factor. So you can imagine if you could do something about even a 10% shift there, it would be monumental compared to sort of a whack-a-mole approach to all the downstream consequences of aging. I'd actually go one step further, and I forget if I've mentioned this before, but if we just think about cognition right now, let's just stay focused on the brain and its aging. So if we focus on cognitive function, we pretty much peak in our 40s. And I know that, especially for someone at my age, it's a horrible thing to contemplate, but I'm sorry, it's true. So over time, our cognitive capacity just relentlessly declines. You know, there's a reason that race car drivers are not usually in their 50s. There's a reason professional sports is a young person's game. Your reflex time slows, everything slows. I say that because that means that by the time a person is 80 years old, let's say, they're suffering from a loss of cognitive capacity. There's just no other way around it. So they are less capable than they were when they were 40. Now let's consider what happens if you have an 80-year-old with a dementing illness such as Alzheimer's. Well, there's a disease process and that disease process has accelerated the rate of cognitive decline. But there's a huge implication here. And that is that for that 80-year-old with dementia, they actually have two problems. The first is the loss of cognition that is the natural part of aging. And the second is the loss of cognition that is due to the disease process itself. Why is that important? It's important because if you look at the results of the monoclonal antibodies where I said the rate of cognition, cognitive decline was slowed, we honestly do not know which of the processes I just described those monoclonal antibodies are impacting. Are they perhaps just slowing the normal aging process or are they actually interfering with the disease process? Now, to a person with dementia, that question is irrelevant. If the treatment is going to make me better, I want it. But to someone doing dementia research, that question is critical because we need to know are we working on the biology of aging or are we working on the biology of this particular disease process? And I would say right now we cannot make those distinctions. I'd like to switch gears a bit and talk about a fascinating series of studies you conducted on the benefits of exposure to Japanese gardens on the clinical symptoms in individuals with Alzheimer's disease. In a paper that appeared in the Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, you found the observation that a Japanese garden not only relieved physiological stress, but also improved qualitative measures such as verbalization and memory retrieval. How did you become interested in Japanese gardens and did the results surprise you? Well, the answer to how I got involved goes back to a theme we were talking about in the very beginning. It was another one of my life's accidents. This all started when I was a new faculty member at Rutgers University. The president at the time decided that since Rutgers was a state university and his faculty, his new faculty were coming from all over the world that they really needed to spend some time getting immersed in New Jersey as a state. And we will avoid all the jokes that normally come with that description. But anyways, he arranged for a bus tour every year with all of the new faculty that have been hired by Rutgers. And Rutgers is a pretty big school so that meant that there were about 50 of us and there were two buses. And I do remember talking to my dean. I was chair at the time and I said, really, Ken, I just can't imagine going on this trip. It's too hokey. It's been decades since I've stepped on a yellow school bus and I'm not about to do it again. And he said, well, he said, the president of the university is so committed to this that he actually goes on this trip and you will have unfettered access to him for three days. I suggest you go. So I went and it was really cool. I actually had a great time. Turns out New Jersey is a really interesting state. But that's not the point of the story. The point of the story is that the other thing the president was really interested in was fostering communication among the faculty. So he said, every time we take a bus trip from one location to another, sit next to somebody different and get to know that person. So on one of the last trips, I found myself next to a young Japanese woman who had just been hired by the landscape architecture department. And she said, what do you do? And I said, well, I study Alzheimer's disease. And I said, what do you do? She said, well, I'm a landscape architect with a specialty in the theory and design of Japanese gardens. So we both started to yawn because this didn't seem like it was the discussion was going to go anywhere until she said, well, you know, it's interesting that I've been thinking recently about designing gardens with the design principles that I know from the famous Japanese gardens of the past, but designing them for interior spaces to try and recreate some of their calming benefits. And she said, one of the places I'm interested in is in old age homes. I said, oh, well, that's interesting. I said, why don't we get together and maybe have coffee? Anyways, long story short, that began at what is now, good lord, it's almost a 20-year collaboration between the two of us. Seiko Goto is her name. She's now returned to Japan. She's a professor in Nagasaki University, but we're still collaborating. We've built Japanese gardens in New Jersey. We built one in the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. She's looked at gardens in mainland China, and the results are always the same. And it's fascinating that there's something about the design principles that will literally cut through the fog of dementia and lower the stress rate of an individual. And it's not age-dependent. We've done it with young people as well as old people. Our latest work suggests that it might actually have to do with the pattern of eye movements, how you take in the scene. And then finally, as a neuroscientist, this sort of begins to get me toward tying some threads together. And so, our latest paper that's under review right now in a Frontiers journal looks at the pattern of eye movements as one of the drivers of this effect. So this work you've done with Japanese gardens contributes to a large body of literature showing the critical importance of the environment in shaping and maintaining cognitive function. For example, in the story of Dorothy that opens your book, it almost seemed to me when I read it that each successive increase in institutionalization that she experienced preceded a sudden decline in her cognitive capacities, which partly mirrors the story of Auguste Dieter, who was Alzheimer's first patient, who he obviously met after she was placed in an asylum. So I was wondering if you could talk about the importance of social cognitive and environmental stimuli for cognitive function more broadly and how we might leverage that. I think it's hugely important. It's really hard to study for many, many reasons and just even the work we've done with Japanese gardens is an example of how difficult it can be. How do you control the intervention to use the language of clinical trials? And the answer isn't easy. And how do you do a randomized clinical trial? The answer, again, is not easy. However, what drives Seiko and me on and others who are in this area, what drives us on is that the effects are palpable. And it should come as no surprise, but the environment that our nervous system finds itself in is a huge factor in its performance. And the visual stimulus of a garden is just really the tip of the iceberg. So, it's interesting. In our latest paper, we talk about a technique used to treat post-traumatic stress syndrome called EMDR. And EMDR is a way of training the eyes to move back and forth in a bilateral way with perhaps other sensory stimuli such as sound or touch. but this bilateral stimulation moving back and forth while the person is thinking of the traumatic event has proven tremendously effective. We try and draw the analogy that the architects who refined the style of the Japanese garden may have inadvertently worked in such a way as to create a scene where the natural instinct of the eye is to go back and forth quickly and to try and take in the entire scene rather than focus on a single object. But you can see just from that description that's a nice speculation. It's a nice theory. But how do you go prove that? Very hard. But the effect is clear. With EMDR, it's even more clear that it is for many people an effective therapy at limiting the symptoms. But just to come back to the main point, the environment that our brains find themselves in is hugely important for its function. Following up on the Japanese garden example, more broadly, you've pointed out that non-pharmacological approaches have been the most effective tools in the fight against Alzheimer's thus far. What are some of the things that in your view people should do to maintain their brain health and resist this appalling disorder? So, good question. And before I answer, I always want to remind people that the initials after my name are PhD, not MD. So, anything I say is the remarks of a basic scientist, not a clinician. That said, the experimental evidence is that aggressive control of blood pressure is really good for you. The onset of type 2 diabetes is a huge risk factor for developing dementia. And so, watching diet, you know, to avoid the sorts of high-carb, high-sugar diets that lead to adult-onset diabetes is really important. So, exercise, both mental and physical, and, I mean, there was even a study that a multivitamin supplement has a positive effect. These are all successful trials. Again, I caution your listeners that one successful trial is one successful trial. They need to be repeated. But the accumulating evidence is that these more simple, non-pharmacological approaches, and as you say, it relates back to the Japanese garden and the cognitive environment in which we find ourselves. These simple techniques are really, really good at maintaining brain health. You're involved with or support at least two charitable organizations that hope to change the face of funding for Alzheimer's Research. They are the Coins for Alzheimer's Research Trust and the Clear Thoughts Foundation. Can you talk about your relationship with these groups and how you hope the landscape for funding Alzheimer's Research might change in the coming years? So, both of them certainly began as small, local efforts triggered by the loss of a family member who had a dementing illness. In the case of Clear Thoughts Foundation, it was actually a case of frontotemporal dementia that was the catalyst in the case of CART or the Coins for Alzheimer's Research Trust. It was diagnosed Alzheimer's Disease, but in both cases, it was lay people just trying to channel their frustration into doing something to advance the research. So, I'm involved with both of them and, you know, I accept a huge salary of zero from both, but I'm quite passionate about both because I feel that it's, these organizations are filling the gap much more effectively than the NIH or more established organizations like the Alzheimer's Association. I mean, both NIH and the Alzheimer's Association do great work, but with CART and with Clear Thoughts, I'm able to at least help guide them into a much more holistic approach to the disease. And CART has grown dramatically. They are now really, really serious funders of Alzheimer's disease research and because I'm able to sit on their scientific advisory board, I'm able to help guide the work that they fund into this more broad view of dementia and aging. I think that's fantastic work and really important, like you said, to fill some of those gaps and diversify our interest in that research. Thanks so much for such a fascinating interview today, Carl. I just have one last question, which is whether you have a Japanese garden in your own backyard. I wish I did, but I do not. I guess now that COVID's over, I may be able to entice Seiko to come back to the United States and see what you can do in the Scrabble patch that passes for my backyard. Well, Carl, this was wonderful and thank you very much for coming on STEM Talk. I appreciate the opportunity. Thanks to both of you for having me. Thank you. Thanks, Carl. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. You know, Ken, when I read Carl's book, I knew that he would be an excellent guest for STEM Talk and I'm glad to say that the conversation did not disappoint. After listening to Carl today, I think it's clear why he titled his book How Not to Study a Disease. It's disappointing that we've taken so many wrong turns in the search for a cure for Alzheimer's, but I think the book provides a blueprint for how we can increase the likelihood of success in the future. My wife, Elizabeth Nance, another previous STEM Talk guest, even bought a copy of Carl's book for every student in her lab. I think that what we both appreciated about Carl's research and book is that he gives us a fresh conceptualization of aging, dementia, and neuroscience research more broadly. You're right, Tommy. This was indeed a fascinating conversation. When Carl's book came out, he was quoted as saying, science moves faster if everyone is questioning everyone else's thinking. It forces you to sharpen your argument, and I certainly agree with that. And as we've noted before on STEM Talk, science does not proceed by consensus. I highly encourage the readers to check out our show notes for today's interview, where you can find links to Carl's research, as well as a link to his book. This is Tommy Wood signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on STEM Talk. Thank you for listening to STEM Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others, so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, stemtalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview. There is a resource at STEM Talk 100. Tell us to Our Letters