 Welcome to STEM Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host, Dawn Cornegas, and join me to introduce today's podcast is a man behind the garden, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all the guests who appear on STEM Talk. So today we have Dr. Kevin J. Tracy, a neurosurgeon and pioneer in biological medicine, who is the president and CEO of the Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research in New York. Kevin is a leader in neuroscience and also studies inflammation, and he was the first to identify the inflammatory reflex, which is a physiological mechanism that regulates the body's immune response to injury and invasion. Today we get to talk to Kevin about the molecular mechanisms of inflammation and the use of vagus nerve stimulation to treat it. With electrical stimulation delivered through small implantable devices, Kevin and his research colleagues have demonstrated that the vagus nerve's inflammatory reflex can be activated to dampen or reduce inflammation in the body. And this could potentially lead to cures for diseases without using traditional pharmaceuticals that often come with side effects and also high costs. Kevin is also a professor of neurosurgeon and molecular medicine at the Zucker School of Medicine. He is the inventor of more than 120 United States patents and the author of more than 450 scientific publications. Before we get to our interview with Kevin, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to STEM Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the loidiest and most lavishly praise-filled reviews to read on STEM Talk. If you hear your review read on STEM Talk, just contact us at stemtalk at ihmc.us to claim your official STEM Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker EJE. The review is titled, Stimulating and Clear. The review reads, I appreciate the diversity of topics that you cover on STEM Talk, and I always find myself learning new and interesting things. I have a suggestion. It would be great if you could get someone on STEM Talk to discuss autonomous vehicles. We will take that advice, and thank you, EJE, and thanks to all of our other STEM Talk listeners who've helped STEM Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now on to today's interview with Dr. Kevin Tracy. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. Hi, welcome to STEM Talk. I'm your host, Dawn Cornegas, and joining us today is Kevin Tracy. Kevin, welcome to the podcast. Thanks for having me. It's a pleasure to be here. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Dawn. Mm-hmm. So, Kevin, to start off with, I understand that you have a tragic but compelling story about an experience that you had as a five-year-old that really planted the seed for you to become a neurosurgeon. Can you tell us about that? When I was five, my mother died suddenly of a brain tumor. At the time it happened, I have very few memories of it, but at the time it happened, what I remember is being in the backseat of the car driving to see her father, my grandfather, because he was a professor of pediatrics at Yale Medical School. This was in 1963. It was a long drive. It was hot. And I didn't know at the time in that car ride, but it would be the last time that I would see my mother. She was diagnosed with a glioblastoma multiforme at Yale New Haven Hospital where she had a brain surgery, a craniotomy, and she never woke up from the surgery. And so I remember a week or two after her funeral being at my grandfather's house, and I climbed up in his lap, and I said, why didn't your friend Bill, the neurosurgeon, take the tumor out? And my grandfather said, well, if he had done that, it would have done so much damage to her brain. The tumor was like a crab in her brain with legs extending throughout her brain, and if he had pulled on the tumor, it would have damaged parts of her brain far away from the tumor. And I said, well, somebody should do something about that. And my grandfather, who had a long history in polio research at Yale, looked at me and said, well, maybe you will. And that memory stuck with me. It turned out to be probably pretty good career advice. But to say that that's why I became a neurosurgeon doing research, that's a bit of a stretch. You know, when you look back on decades of a career, of work, you can connect the dots any way you want. But as a kid, I didn't dream of being a neurosurgeon. I did dream of being a scientist. And what an impact at such a young age. And even though you knew growing up that you wanted to become a neurosurgeon or something along the lines of neurosurgery or neurosurgical science, you also were incredibly curious as a young person, and you were always building things and taking them apart. And what I'd like to know, is it true that when you were a teenager and got your first car, that you were so curious about how to do a valve job yourself that you took the engine out of the car? Absolutely true. Yes, it is. So I remember my father came home from work one day, and my friends and I had completely disassembled the engine. And we had spread all the parts across the floor of the garage. And my father got out of his car, walked over, looked at us, looked at the engine parts all over the garage, and said to me, it'll never run again. And lit a cigarette and walked back in the house. And I wasn't sure at the time if he was angry or simply coaching me and trying to inspire me to be careful. But it did run again. That car ran great for many years afterwards. It was a blast. I hope you left the engine block in the car. No, we took the engine block out. We boarded the cylinders and did a ring job. It was, you know, when I got toys as a kid, I always wanted to take them apart and put them back together. And to me, that's how you do science, even today in the modern era. The most important question, I think, to make something new in science is to understand how the world works, how the universe works, how molecules work, how signals work, how things work. And, you know, I think if I couldn't do what I do today, I'd probably be an engineer. That's a really great story. After graduating from high school, you enrolled at Boston College, where you got a bachelor's degree in chemistry. You then moved over to Boston University right across town, the School of Medicine, to pursue an MD. Can you tell us about the transition and how you made that choice? It's a really important question because I struggled with how to make that choice. So I loved chemistry. I did an undergraduate thesis in organic chemistry, and I was so fortunate to have my first career mentor at Boston College, T. Ross Kelly, who was one of the leading natural product organic synthesis chemists, perhaps of his era, definitely in Boston at the time. And after the organic chemistry final exam, which was, of course, in May or something, I remembered Professor Kelly came up to me and said, Kevin, what are you doing this summer? I said, well, I'm going to go home and work. I have to make money to pay for school. He said, well, would you ever stay in Boston for the summer and work in my lab? And I'm like, I can do that? He said, well, you did really well on the exam, and I offer jobs to the students who do well on that exam. And so I called my father and said, you know, do you think we could swing this? He said, if you work enough hours in the lab, then you might be able to swing it. So I went back to Dr. Kelly. I said, Dr. Kelly, I do want to stay, but I really have to make enough money to pay tuition next year. Can I work 65 hours a week in the lab to make expenses? He said, sure. So that's what I did. And that was my introduction to working in a lab. And if it wasn't for that, I don't know if I'd be sitting here today. It ignited a spark in me that launched everything that happened since. So when I finished college, I had to make the choice of, do you want to get a PhD in organic chemistry, which I loved, medicinal chemistry, organic chemistry? Or do you want to go to medical school? And I chose medical school because I wanted my science to be in the context of inventing therapies and making new drugs, making new treatments. And in order to do that, I wanted to learn about how physiology works, how disease works, how pathology works. And so I decided to go to medical school instead of graduate school. It does make sense, given the whole context of your life up to that point. Kevin, a little birdie told me that during your first year of medical school, your friends were perhaps more likely to find you on a golf course than in a classroom. That can't be true, is it? Well, if I find that little birdie, I will give it a piece of my mind. You should. Birdies talk too much. It's absolutely true. I was very unhappy in my first year of medical school. It was a lot back then. A lot has changed. But back then, it was a lot of rote memorization. And it wasn't being taught about taking things apart and putting them back together again, which is how I learned. And so I was ready to quit, frankly. And in that time period, the first semester, I did spend a lot of time playing golf. And I took several strokes off my handicap. It's probably the best golfer I ever was, was back in medical school. But what I did do is I approached a biochemistry professor, Karl Franz Blau, who was arguably one of the leading experts in the country, if not the world, on collagen synthesis and collagen. And he had been developing startup companies to make collagen gels that could be used to grow skin. And he had been making startup companies working with monoclonal antibodies, which were then a brand new thing. And I went up to Professor Franz Blau after he gave a brilliant lecture. And I stood there on stage with him. And I said, I'd like to have a job in your lab because I'm going to quit medical school. And he looked at me and said, come to lunch tomorrow in my office. Bring a sandwich. So I did. And we're sitting in his office. And we talked for a while. And I explained my love for research and science and what I wanted to do. And he said, I'll give you a job in my lab if you promise not to quit medical school. Wow. So I worked with him for two years. And we wrote some papers. And I gave my first poster at a national meeting and published my first first author paper. And so, again, another brilliant mentor that if it wasn't for Ross Kelly and Carl Fonsbaugh, I wouldn't be sitting here without doubt. That's fantastic. And so your next stop after med school is the neurological surgery training program at New York Hospital, which is home of the Cornell University Medical College. So how did that come about? So, again, my career goal at that point was to build a laboratory in the context of a clinical department. And back then, it was 1983. The best way to do that was to go to an academic program that had resources to support laboratories led by the professors, by the clinicians. So my first choice was medicine versus surgery. I chose surgery because I love to operate. I love to do things with my hands. And then the second choice was where to go. And I looked at the programs that if they didn't require it, they strongly encouraged taking two years out of the residency. This was general surgery at the time, general surgery residencies, taking two years out of the clinical training program to do research. And I met Dr. Tom Shires, G. Tom Shires, who was the head of surgery at New York Hospital Cornell at the time, now called Weill Cornell in New York City. And he told me if I came to his program that he would guarantee two years in a laboratory. Now, Dr. Shires was one of the most famous surgeon researchers of his era. He had operated on Governor Connolly during the JFK assassination, and he had worked with the automobile industry and with the Department of Defense to standardize seatbelts in cars and resuscitation protocols for blood loss in soldiers, which today is standard of care in every hospital and in every battlefield around the world. Dr. Shires proved that when you lose a certain amount of blood, say a unit, that an order to resuscitate the patient, you have to get back two or two and a half units of Ringer's lactate or normal saline. This changed everything. He saved countless lives, probably millions, by the adoption of this basic principle. And so I thought if I could work with someone who does that kind of research as a mentor, that it couldn't get better than that. And so that's why I chose the New York Hospital. But it was in general surgery where I spent four years training in general surgery. I switched to neurosurgery for the same reason that I made all my other decisions. Which was the neurosurgery departments at that time were rich in resources. I reasoned that neurosurgery is interesting. Surgery on the brain and the nervous system is fascinating. I wanted to learn how to do it and how things worked. And plus, because they had lots of resources, my reasoning went, I should be able to build a successful laboratory when I finish my training. So that's what I did. Fantastic. And changing directions a little bit. So we're going to talk about sepsis, which is a condition that causes the body to overact to infection. And immune cells, which are designed to protect the body, suddenly start attacking healthy cells. And sepsis annually kills more than 350,000 people. So as a young neurosurgeon, you unfortunately experienced the just awful reality of sepsis when an 11-month-old burn victim died in your arms. So Kevin, can you share the story with us and then also talk about how it changed the trajectory of your career? When I was training at the New York Hospital as a surgery resident, I rotated through the burn unit. And I was called to the emergency room to meet a burn victim who turned out to be an 11-month-old girl named Janice. So when I met her in the emergency room, she was scalded over 90% of her body because she had been crawling across the kitchen floor when her grandmother was cooking dinner. And as grandma turned to drain the boiling water into the sink for the pasta, she tripped over Janice and spilled the water on her granddaughter. And so this tragic story from the instant I heard the story and met Janice burned a memory in my mind. And so she was a very special little girl. Her face was not burned. She was a beautiful little 11-month-old who had a tough time. I mean, her risks of survival were quite low. And we knew that on the first day. But somehow for week after week, she kept pulling through. She fought off sepsis. She fought off respiratory failure and going on a ventilator. She fought off kidney failure. And we thought, oh my goodness, maybe she's actually going to be able to be discharged. And I was standing in the doorway to her room one lunch hour. And I watched as she was drinking out of a baby bottle rocking in the arms of a nurse. And Janice's eyes rolled up in the back of her head. And I saw on the monitor that her heart had stopped. I ran into the room and I put her into the crook of my left arm and gave her mouth to mouth and pushed on her chest. The nurse ran out to the desk. They called the code. And it seemed like the whole hospital descended on Janice. It was lunch hour. And so everybody was available. And the code went on and on and on, probably 45 minutes or an hour. And I remember there was a cardiac fellow, surgery fellow there, Al Pfister. And he floated a cardiac pacemaker into her right ventricle, which is something that just hadn't been done in a child at that hospital, maybe only once or twice before. And everything went perfectly, but Janice was gone. And I had to tell her mother, which I'll never forget, because the woman screamed and then fell into a dead faint on the floor. And afterwards, to make this story even worse, is that we couldn't explain why she died. It's hard to make that story worse, I know. But imagine having no idea why she died, because we didn't. The dogma was that she must have had an infection that released lipopolysaccharide or other bacterial toxins, and that this infection had prompted her to go into septic shock. But we never found any infection. And there was no evidence of infection when I got her autopsy report back. So I decided, you know, as I said before to you, I knew I was going to have a career in a laboratory, but I hadn't picked a project. Janice motivated me to begin studying sepsis and inflammation and shock. That's an incredibly intense story. I can see how it would motivate you in a profound way. Ever since her death, I understand that you've really been, among many other things, focused on the question of why does septic shock occur? What causes this? And we saw a TED Talk where you describe what happened to Janice. And you said in that talk, good science begins with hard questions. And that certainly is a hard question. Can you elaborate on your belief that good science begins with hard questions? You only go around once, right? And, you know, I learned that when I was five. Life can be short and life can be fleeting. And so when you go in a laboratory and approach a problem, you really have to ask yourself. And this was something I learned from one of my other mentors, from Tony Cerami. Tony used to say, if God came down right now and answered the question you're thinking about studying, would anybody care? And it's a really good metric. It's a really good guide to ask about how to think through which questions to answer. Another one of my mentors, Stephen Lowry, used to say to me, the most important thing to do is to pick the right question. Absolutely. It's not easy. It really is not easy. And so if you have a choice between going into a scientific program, a series of laboratory experiments or a series of questions, and you knew the answer to the experiment you were thinking of doing next, does it provide an incremental advance or is it a major step forward? And so I would much rather spend two or three or six months thinking about the answer to that question before I start the experiments than just throwing a bunch of experiments against the wall and seeing what will stick. Because at the end, the hard questions that would provide a surprising answer are the ones that accelerate and catalyze progress. And that's what my colleagues and I try to do. Absolutely. And these days, there's more and more throw the data at the wall and then see if something looks like it correlates or if there's a cluster, but there's not the sort of hypotheses-driven model that you're discussing. Well, it's part hypothesis and it's part deductive reasoning, right? So it's like if I was building, I remember Carl Nathan at Cornell said to me once, I said, Carl, we've got this new observation in the lab and we know what we saw works, but I can't imagine how to explain it to anybody else. And he said to me something related to this whole line of reasoning. He said to me, Kevin, imagine that you were designing the system in the first place. How would you design the system to work in the best way that would give you the answer that you just saw? And then you fill in all the blanks for all the moving parts. And I call that research. It's interesting. Evolution has produced designs that I would have never thought of, but I'm insufficiently creative, I think, in that regard. I think creativity is a vastly underrated skill and virtue in doing the best science. You know, Albert Einstein used to say, imagination is more powerful than knowledge. And I think that the ability to sit and imagine and create before you start doing all the experiments, I think that's key. I think that's key to the scientific progress we need to invent new therapies. And, you know, I don't think it can all be done by, by hype. But if you want to call the, you can intersect the creative process and generating hypotheses in lots of different ways. But that's really, I think, some of it's semantics. I think too much science today is being done without the creative spark and the imagination. And as you said before, I think too much science today is being done by, let's just look at the data and this big data and see what it tells us. I think in Philip Ball's book, How Life Works, which is a brilliant book I recommend to everybody, he breaks this down with very simple reasoning to explain how complicated it is. You know, he starts with the basic premise, which is that all life is not encoded in a linear strand of DNA. It's more complicated than that. And in the next several hundred pages of his book, he explains why. And it touches on exactly what you just said. You can't get all the answers from decoding a linear sequence of letters. Definitely agree with you, Kevin. And you often describe yourself as a brain surgeon who is fascinated by inflammation. So we're curious, how do you respond when somebody asks you, what is inflammation? In today's world, I start by explaining that 60 million people on the planet earth die every year and 40 million of them, two thirds die of diseases that are either caused by or made worse by inflammation. So one way to think of inflammation in the modern world today is that it is the single major threat to long health spans because it contributes to the major killers and the major unsolved diseases on the planet. So the clinical definition of inflammation dates all the way back to Galen and Celsus and who described heat and pain and swelling and redness as the cardinal signs of inflammation. And I mean, that explains a lot today clinically, but it was only in the last, what, 30 years or so, 40 years maybe, that we began to understand that those conditions, those signs of, those cardinal signs of inflammation are actually mediated by specific molecules and specific receptors and specific cells that have specific jobs to produce those effects. And from that understanding of the role of individual molecules, for the first time in the last few decades, we've been able to develop drugs that effectively reverse or prevent inflammation. So that's where we really are in modern medicine, because as much as we know, there's, there's a tremendous amount we don't know. And what we don't know is, is contributing to the major causes of death on the planet earth every year. Following up on that, back in 1987, you made significant inroads in your investigation of inflammation with your discovery of tumor necrosis factor or TNF. This contributed to a whole new class of drugs for inflammatory and autoimmune diseases as well. Weren't you working, as I understand it, with lab baboons as part of a study when you made this discovery? The discoveries that my colleagues and I made around the biology of TNF did lead ultimately to the use of monoclonal anti-TNF antibodies in the clinic. And the story from the lab is a fascinating one. My colleagues and I included some of the folks I've already mentioned to you, Dr. Shires, Dr. Lowry, Dr. Cerami, and many others. There was a large team of researchers at Rockefeller University and at Cornell New York Hospital and at Memorial Sloan-Kettering, all working on the idea that a molecule that today we call tumor necrosis factor might have a role in treating cancer. The hope was, by some labs, that giving tumor necrosis factor to animals or even humans, where it eventually was given to humans, with cancer, that it would treat the cancer. But Bruce Boitler, working with Tony Cerami before I joined the lab, and then Steve Lowry and Tom Shires and myself later on joining with a large group of people, the question we were asking is, is TNF not specific to tumors, but maybe TNF actually causes inflammation and tissue injury when it's produced during inflammation in excessive amounts. And to prove that, what I did in Steve Lowry's lab was we started treating animals, giving normal animals, mice and rats, tumor necrosis factor. And what we saw was stunning. What we saw was that the appearance of tumor necrosis factor in the blood could actually kill the animal in a form of lethal shock that was pretty indistinguishable from what had happened to Janice. And so we realized it wasn't the bacteria or the bacterial toxins that had probably killed Janice. It was probably cytokines, like TNF, that had done this to her. And today, of course, cytokines are talked about in the context of COVID and other conditions because of cytokine storm, this cascade of cytokines that can be very dangerous or lethal. And the preeminent early cytokine turns out to be TNF. And that's what we proposed. That's what we identified. And having done that, the question was, could we block it? And so my colleagues and I used baboons on the eighth floor of Cornell Medical School. We built an animal operating room and we had two baboons side by side on operating tables and we set it up like a baboon ICU. Now, I should point out, baboons are not an endangered species. They're almost like raccoons or pests in some parts of Africa or they run up and they'll steal the suitcases from the tourists going into the hotel. But these baboons, we treated them as if they were patients with sepsis. And we did this by infusing the baboons with massive amounts of bacteria to cause them to go into shock like Janice had. And when we treated one of the baboons with monoclonal anti-TNF antibodies, we showed for the first time that monoclonal anti-TNF antibodies can prevent inflammation and it prevented the lethal shock. And today, those antibodies are used by millions of patients around the world to treat inflammation in conditions like rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease. Fantastic. And Kevin, in the late 1990s, as you were continuing your research into TNF, you made an even more important and surprising discovery that allowed you and your colleagues to merge insights from neuroscience and immunology. Before we talk about this accidental discovery, it might be good to first explain that within each of us, we have simple reflex circuits that harmonize the activity of our individual organs. And you've written about Charles Scott Sherrington, who is a British physiologist who won the Nobel Prize in 1932 for research that laid the groundwork for contemporary neuroscience. And he did this by showing how our reflex circuits are the building blocks of our nervous system. So just for a little bit more background, can you touch on why this was such a significant discovery? Charles Sherrington is one of the two fathers of neuroscience, he and Ramon Icahal. And what Sherrington did so brilliantly was break down the complex nervous system, you know, comprised in animals of billions of neurons, and in humans are probably 100 billion neurons. And he broke it down to map simple circuits. Now, Ramon Icahal had shown that reflexes begin by the input from a sensory nerve. And then that sensory input, the afferent arc of a reflex activates either through direct signaling or through traveling through an interneuron, a returning signal and an efferent or motor arc that tends to act in opposition to the sensory input. And what Sherrington realized by studying decerebrated cats and many other different animal preparations, what Sherrington realized was that reflexes had to be cooperating or operating, if you will, together. And what he showed is that for a muscle movement to be smooth rather than ratchety, there must be reciprocal reflexes that are relaxing, if you will, the muscle groups that normally antagonize the movement that's occurring. So for instance, in the knee-jerk reflex, what you see when your leg bounces up is the contraction of your quadriceps femoris. What you don't see is that there's a simultaneous reflex relaxation, if you will, of the muscles in the hamstring group. So Sherrington realized that you had to understand simple reflexes to understand how motor functions were coordinated. But he extended that reasoning in a beautiful way. And what he said was, you have to understand a simple reflex to understand how the nervous system works. He said, and you can, then he said, you can assemble multiple reflexes together and build a complex nervous system. And third, he said, having done and said that, you have to remember that there's no such thing as a simple reflex because they're all connected. And that reasoning and thinking about that and the implications of that when you apply it to the control of physiological systems, that's been a driving thought in my research now for the last 20 years. You know, trained as a neurosurgeon, I tapped a lot of reflexes in a lot of patients during the days in the clinic and in the operating room. But then I would go back in the lab and watch the inflammatory conditions of spinning out of control in a dysregulated way and causing problems like shock and lethal tissue injury. And it really got me to thinking, if you were designing a reflex controlled system to control the immune system, how would that work? Dr. Justin Marchegiani That's really interesting. Even for folks that are not in the field, they've heard of him. I mean, this guy is super famous. Dr. Justin Marchegiani Charles Sherrington's book, I recommend to everybody, the integrative action of the nervous system. In today's world, he would probably have been a semi-professional soccer player, football player. And he went on to become quite philosophical and he wrote several important treatises in his later years, thinking through the meaning of life and how that arises from the structure of the nervous system. He was a brilliant, a brilliant individual whose books actually were bestsellers and for decades. Yeah. Dr. Justin Marchegiani That's an amazing fellow. We've talked a little bit about monoclonal antibodies and they've been in the news on and off, as we all know. And they're, as you mentioned, they're used to treat people with a variety of disorders, including rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease and other disorders. You know, they have some noticeable upsides as well as some downsides. And we didn't really talk about them much, just mentioned them and the various disorders they might be used to treat. So could you elaborate on the benefits and the potential downsides? Dr. Justin Marchegiani Monoclonal anti-TNF antibodies moved into clinical development very, very quickly after we wrote the first paper on monoclonal anti-TNF antibodies in 1987. And within seven or eight years, these antibodies had been tried to be used in trials of sepsis and they didn't work in that because in sepsis with cytokine storm, it's like closing the barn door after all the animals had run out. But in diseases that are more slow burning and chronic, like rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease, it turned out that they worked quite well in about a third of the patients, give or take 30%, 40% of patients had a good clinical response to receiving first monoclonal anti-TNF and later, in the later years, more recently, other cytokines like anti-IL-1 and anti-IL-6. But what we learned from this clinical experience is first, these drugs have without doubt helped millions of people. They've been an important tool in the clinical armamentarium to help patients with these potentially disabling or even fatal or serious diseases. But they have not been a cure-all. They don't work in everybody. They have serious side effects. Because they're immunosuppressive, which is how they work, they have black box warnings, which means you can have secondary infections like TB. You can even die from complications of these therapies. And they're invasive. They have to be injected weekly or monthly, depending on the formulation. And if that's not enough, they're extraordinarily expensive. I like to say that because so many patients have gone into financial hardship from reliance on these medications, maybe that should be added to the label, potential bankruptcy. Yeah, that's a good one. Unfortunately, that seems increasingly true these days. Well, I think it's something that has to be built into the formula. When you compare therapies, there's so much happening today in modern medicine. When you talk about the risks and benefits of a therapy, you also have to have a conversation about the risk and benefits, not only of that therapy, but of alternative therapies, not only of the alternative therapies, but you have to balance this whole conversation, which is sometimes not done or certainly not done in short form conversations, as opposed to this long form chat we're having. You have to also balance these things against against the risk of not treating the disease. I mean, you know, so what you're, what we're left with, with the biologics today for some serious autoimmune or autoinflammatory diseases, what you're left with is balancing the very real risks of an untreated disease, which can cause serious disability or even death. Some, some of these diseases versus the serious side effects of expensive medications that don't work except maybe 40% of the time. I mean, this is the conversation people have to have. So Kevin, in the late 1990s, you also had another aha discovery that came about unexpectedly. So you were working with your lab colleagues on an alternative approach to block TNF, and your original hypothesis was that injecting a molecule that you had developed directly into the brain would prevent TNF from spreading during a cerebral infarction or stroke. And I understand that you were unprepared for what you all found. So what was that? We had developed a molecule that we had called 1493 and 1493 was a, was an anti-inflammatory molecule. We were trying to make an alternative to monoclonal anti-TNF. It had become clear by that time that the side effects were serious, that monoclonal anti-TNF doesn't work in everybody. And so as scientists, as people interested in making new therapies, we set out to make a new class of molecules that would block the production of TNF and stop cytokine storm, block IL-1 and IL-6 and the others. And we hit upon 1493, and I won't go into the chemistry or the long story of why we invented that molecule, but what we did. And it worked beautifully in animal models. It stopped inflammation. It worked so well in animal models that we actually did clinical trials. We did a clinical trial at the Beth Israel in Boston, and we administered that 1493 to patients who were being treated for cancer by getting an IL-2 infusion. IL-2 is used to treat some forms of cancer, but its side effect is it causes the patients to make a lot of TNF, which causes serious side effects. And we showed in the patients that 1493 blocked the production of TNF in those IL-2 treated cancer patients. So everything was going great. We used to joke in the lab, back then on Saturday Night Live, there was a skit, baseball been very, very good to me. We used to say 1493 has been very, very good to us. And we thought it couldn't get any better until one day we put the 1493 into the brains of animals with an experimental stroke. And the idea was the 1493 would stop the inflammation in the brain and the stroke would be better. And it was, it worked beautifully. And in the course of writing the paper, we did some additional control experiments, but there was a miscommunication with the research team setting up the animals. We had asked them to put endotoxin in the brain as a control and they did, but in another group of animals, they put endotoxin in the body, in the blood. And they also put the 1493 in the brain. And when those results came back, we were, we were blown away. The drug in the brain, 1493 in the brain, in vanishingly small amounts, had, had somehow switched off the production of cytokine storm, TNF throughout the body. And there was just no way for us to explain that. This made no sense. How could this have happened? Wow. That had to be a real point of amazement. So at this point, as I understand the story, and please correct me if I've got this wrong, you started looking into some well-established methods in neuroscience, particularly those that link specific areas of the brain to specific behavior. And as most of our listeners will know, a pioneer in this field was the famous German neurologist Karl Wernicke. In the late 1800s, he identified the inability of some people to grasp the meaning of spoken words and sentences due to damage in the left posterior temporal regions of the brain. As a side note that you may find interesting, we have a former colleague and a good friend here at IHMC, whose name is in fact, Karl Wernicke. And he just so happens to be related to the famous German neurologist. It is indeed really a small world. So could you tell us about your foray into, into that area? To begin, I would ask if you could please get a picture, just, just print for me from online, download some black and white picture of the brain and ask your friend, Karl, to sign it right over Wernicke's area. And I will hang that in my office. Oh, that's a great idea. I wish I had thought of that. So the idea that the brain controls specific behaviors is the extension of what we talked about before with Professor Sherrington, Charles Sherrington's work. So, I mean, if you cut a nerve, you lose the function of that finger or toe or leg or whatever nerve was damaged or cut. In the brain, if you remove parts of the brain, and this can happen in Wernicke's original observations by looking at patients with brain injury or stroke, you're essentially removing nerves. And by building maps of the brain back in the 19th century, it became possible to start to think about how different brain regions had more or less influence in different types of behavior. Now, today, of course, we know it's much more complicated than that, partly because we understand that behavior through fMRI and PET and other complex imaging analyses, we know that multiple brain regions have overlapping and shared functions in controlling behaviors. And this is because behaviors operate through networks, and networks have nodes. And so the Wernicke node is incredibly important in the language process, but it's not the only part of the brain that's operating during that language processing. But from thinking about it from Sherrington's point of view, you can think about it as nodes, and each node is connected to a series of reflexes, and the nodes are connected to each other. And so this gives a framework for starting to understand, first of all, how complicated it is. But second of all, it gives us a way to start to think about how to study it. And today, we study it using methods like optogenetics, where we can specifically tag individual neurons sharing common features, like, for instance, cholinergic neurons that make acetylcholine. They can all be tagged in a mouse with a light-sensitive protein called opsins. And now we can go in with a laser beam, and we can ask on a neuron-by-neuron basis, by shining the laser beam on different parts of the brain of the mouse, we can ask, what is this cholinergic neuron in this brain region contributing to the behavior we're interested in? And we've been doing that even in the context of producing TNF and inhibiting TNF during inflammation. And those tools are powerful, and we've come a long ways from Carl's great-great-great-whatever, grandfather or great-uncle, whatever he is. So, Kevin, this insight that discrete brain regions control specific behaviors led you to postulate that cutting the individual circuits connecting the brain and organs could reveal the identity of specific areas that control TNF. So, can you walk us through what happened next after you had this insight? Absolutely. We had seen now that putting a molecule in the brain was shutting off TNF in the body of the animal, of the mouse. And the question was, how does the signal get out? Well, the first place we looked was the pituitary gland because we reasoned there was a lot known then that the pituitary controls the adrenal glands. The adrenal glands make glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoids are anti-inflammatory. We said, well, that would be the simple explanation that 1493 somehow activated the pituitary adrenal access and the steroids coming out were turning off the TNF. So, we repeated the experiment in animals who we had removed their pituitary gland, and we got the same result. In other words, the pituitary gland wasn't doing it. So, now the question was, well, how else does the brain talk to the immune system? And we came up cold because all that was left was nerves, neurons. And there were no neuronal pathways connecting the brain to the immune system. So, back then at that time, you know, when people talked about neuroimmunology or psychoneuroimmunology, they were mostly talking about the effects of inflammation on the brain. And all of the response of the brain, the reflex response of the brain tended to converge in this reasoning on the pituitary gland, which we showed wasn't it. So, I went to the library for months. And finally, I came across a paper written by Linda Watkins in Boulder, Colorado, who I didn't know at the time, but since, as for obvious reasons, we've become good friends. And Linda showed that when she injected IL-1 into mice or rats, that they got a fever. That was known. I mean, that's how Charles Zinarello discovered IL-1. What Linda did next wasn't known. She cut the vagus nerves in these animals and did it again. And now the animals didn't get a fever. So, what she had discovered and proposed was that signals going up the vagus nerve into the brain were key for the brain to activate the fever response and the other aspects of sickness behavior, the reduced activity, the hunching, huddled posture, the piloerection, the fur standing up on end, and the anorexia. And I thought, wow, what if that's an afferent arm of an inflammatory reflex? If that's true, then the incoming signal might be activating a motor arm in the vagus nerve going back down. And what would that do? Well, it would turn off the cytokines because you wouldn't want to have too much. It would be the brain's way of modulating cytokine balance. And when it became excessive, signals in the motor arc of this hypothetical or imaginary reflex, those signals would turn off the cytokine storm. I said, if that's true, maybe we had accidentally discovered the motor arc by, and that 1493 by mechanisms then and known was turning on the vagus nerve. Well, if it's turning on the vagus nerve, I thought, I can just put an electrode on the vagus nerve, fire it up, and the electrode in the vagus nerve by activating the inflammatory reflex should turn off TNF. And so Mila Borovakova, a neuroscience postdoc in the lab at the time, said she would do the experiment. So I went to the hospital. I went to my operating room. I got a handheld nerve stimulator that we used to use during brain surgery to test the distribution. You know, you don't want to cut a nerve going around a tumor or through a tumor if it's controlling, you know, facial expression. So we would put the stimulator on the nerve during surgery and see if the mouth twitched. So I had that stimulator. I brought it back to the lab. I said, here, let me do this experiment with this stimulator. And she was very offended. She was very upset with me. She said, I can't. I said, why? She goes, I need a proper setup. I need a gold cage. I need a monitor. I need this kind of electrode and this kind of pulse generator. And I said, I can't afford that now. You know, it's a new lab. We're just getting started. But if you do the experiment and it works, I think we'll be able to publish it in nature. And after that, we'll have plenty of resources and I'll buy you all the equipment you need. Well, it worked. And we published it in nature. And today we have lots of fancy equipment to do all that stuff in the lab. Because when she put the nerve stimulator on the vagus nerve, it turned off the TNF production during endotoxemia by about 75%. It didn't block it to zero. It blocked about 75%. And that launched this whole new field of what we call bioelectronic medicine. That's a great story. And for overview, could you briefly give the listeners a perspective on the general function of the vagus nerve, not just its relationship to TNF, but it has very diverse and interesting functions. The vagus nerve is the principal nerve of the parasympathetic nervous system. So the fight or flight nervous system, of course, is the sympathetic nervous system. And it uses primarily norepinephrine as its signal to accelerate, if you will, activities in the cardiovascular system, for example. And the parasympathetic nervous system is the rest and digest arm of the autonomic nervous system. And its principal nerve is the vagus nerve. You know, we call it the vagus nerve, but it's a paired structure. Like you have two thumbs and two kidneys, you have two vagus nerves, one on each side. And it travels from the brainstem at about the level of your ears, your earlobes, down through your neck, chest, and abdomen. And it touches all the organs you don't think about all day long. And it's the home of incoming and outgoing reflex signals. Now, there's a tendency, I think, to oversimplify this, even when we call it the vagus nerve. And there's a tendency for people, some people to think about it as a solid copper wire. It's more like a transatlantic cable with 100,000 fibers on each side. So I like to say we have 200,000 vagus nerves. And each of those fibers has some role in a reflex circuit that keeps your physiology balanced and in homeostasis day in, day out, night in, night out. That's a very nice description. And in our show notes, we'll provide a link to an illustration that beautifully maps the vagus nerve. And it's a really nice illustration. So you looked into this and with respect to TNF and essentially theorized that the TNF off signal, as you described, from the vagus nerve completes a reflex nerve circuit between the brain and the immune system. This really had broad implications. There's the obvious ones that spring to mind, but there must be many. Could you talk briefly about that? The implications of this idea extended very quickly into paths for sort of new scientific inquiry and into paths for developing new therapies. And so let's talk about those separately. So on the scientific inquiry side, we published the first paper in Nature, and it generated a lot of excitement. It did not generate a lot of criticism, as some people have asked and thought about. It was really interesting to a lot of people because we used basic tools in immunology that were available in every immunology lab. And we used basic tools in neuroscience and neurophysiology that were available in every neuroscience and physiology lab. And we combined them, we bridged the fields, we bridged these fields of neuroscience and immunology and physiology. And so that touched a lot of labs and generated a great deal of interest. In fact, when we were writing the first paper, I remember going to the library when we were proposing the inflammatory reflex idea, I said, somebody must have thought of this. It's obviously true because every other organ system is controlled by reflexes. You know, the heart, the lungs, the liver, the gut, everything is reflexively controlled. Why wouldn't the immune system be reflexively controlled? But I couldn't find this idea in the literature. And I said, wow, I'm really surprised that nobody thought of this before. Because as soon as you think it through that way, it's pretty obvious, it must be that way. You know, as a reflex control of immunity, you can have signals from nerves that go to cells, inflammatory cells or immune cells, these signals can be fast, because nerves work quickly. They can be localized, because nerves work locally. And that means if you have a nerve signal to an immune response in your liver, these neural signals can control the effect there that you don't have to be globally immunosuppressed with steroid release that's going to go to your big toe. So all these things came together. And that really sparked, right now, there's hundreds of laboratories working in this field of neuroimmunology because of the ability to use tools from these different fields and now combine the fields. So these basic approaches are now being applied in the broader field of neuroimmunology to answer many, many important questions. And so the science, the scientific interest in this, I mean, I was at a meeting a couple weeks ago at Cold Spring Harbor that brought together people interested in brain, body physiology. And there was a lot of neuroimmunology at that meeting. And I think the consensus of this group, it went on for several days, some of the best scientists in the world were there. And I think the consensus of that group is that neuroimmunology is arguably the hottest field in science and all of science right now. It's got the potential to change how we think about how the brain controls the immune system and other physiological aspects. So that's on the science side. But if it could get any better than that, which is hard to believe, it's also directly translatable, these ideas, into clinical development. And I have to say, the timing of this podcast is great. I know we were supposed to speak earlier, and I'm glad we didn't because it turns out that two weeks ago, there was a major clinical trial announcement that implanting vagus nerve stimulators in more than 200 patients with rheumatoid arthritis in the United States appears to be extremely effective. The company Setpoint Medical, which I co-founded many years ago, announced this clinical trial success. And so what I'm hoping is that the data will be formally presented after the embargo comes off in the coming months, and that I'm also hoping, and certainly don't know, but certainly hope that we are very close now to one day having FDA approval for patients with rheumatoid arthritis to begin having vagus nerve stimulators implanted as a therapy. Wow, that would be great. That's a disease for which people suffer significantly. STEM Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, locomotion, healthspan, resilience, and performance. So just going back, in 2002, you wrote an article for the journal Nature titled, The Inflammatory Reflex, and you emphasized in the paper how ongoing research had identified a basic neural pathway that reflexively monitors and adjusts the inflammatory response. You coined the term, the inflammatory reflex, as a way to describe how the circuit keeps the immune system from becoming overactive or underactive. And so you proposed in the article that because of our expanding knowledge of the inflammatory reflex, it might one day be possible to activate neural anti-inflammatory mechanisms by using things like small molecules to initiate signals in the central nervous system. So Kevin, can you give us a little bit of an overview of the key insights into the inflammatory reflex that you addressed in this article? The article proposed the inflammatory reflex based on the earliest work that we had done looking at how the signals travel down the vagus nerve to control cytokine release in the body. And so some of that article was hypothetical or even prophetic. I'm very happy to say that 22 years later, it turned out that most, if not all, of the prophecies in that article were true. We now understand after work from my colleague and lab co-director Sangeeta Siobhan and all of our students and postdocs who've come through the lab over the years, as well as the work and many, many other laboratories around the world that are actively pursuing these questions, we now understand in exquisite detail how this works. So I mentioned before optogenetics and using laser controlled activity of brain neurons to map these mechanisms. Let's start with that. So we now know that cholinergic neurons in the dorsal motor nucleus of the brainstem, a very small region of the brainstem, that if we activate those neurons with laser light or electrical signals or some drugs, that those cholinergic neurons send signals down into the abdomen. They arrive there at a ganglia called the superior mesenteric celiac ganglion complex. These are ganglia that are outside of the kidney and the spleen. They control the activity of nerves that project into the spleen. Those nerves are adrenergic. They make norepinephrine. The norepinephrine in the spleen, now under the control of the cholinergic neurons way up in the brainstem, that norepinephrine activates T cells, T lymphocytes in the spleen. We discovered that a special type of T lymphocyte in the spleen, which can actually leave the spleen and go to other organs. But these lymphocytes are special because they make acetylcholine. They express the enzyme choline acetyltransferase. So now you've got a cholinergic signal becoming an adrenergic signal, activating a T cell that releases a cholinergic signal. The cholinergic signal, the acetylcholine in the spleen interacts with nicotinic alpha-7 receptors on macrophages. And that's how the cytokines get shut off. So you have two anti-inflammatory signals in this story. The first is the acetylcholine switching off the cytokines being made by macrophages expressing alpha-7. The second is the T cells themselves can leave. And we think this is what happens in rheumatoid arthritis is that the T cells are activated by the neural signals, leave the spleen, go to the joint and make acetylcholine there, say in the elbow or fingers. And this may be, we don't know for sure yet, but this may be how the vagus nerve stimulation is helping those patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Wow. I think it's easy to sort of miss the importance of this article if one isn't in the field. You know, when I looked at the article, a strong takeaway is that the central nervous system reflexively regulates the inflammatory response essentially in real time, just like it controls your heart rate and all kinds of other vital functions. And you use this knowledge then in a very creative way, I would say, for the treatment of inflammation through selective and reversible hardwired neural systems. This must have attracted a tremendous amount of attention in the field. Is that right? Or what was the response to this paper? The response has been tremendous. I have to agree with you. The response has been inspiring to watch because so many other, first of all, many other labs have repeated this fundamental work. And that's always gratifying and important, of course. But secondly, they've taken it in new directions that have amplified this. So what we've always been very careful about in that original article, and hopefully in every article we've published since, is to point out that this is one pathway we're studying. And we're studying it in a reductionist way in order to achieve appropriate scientific, you know, credibility and criticism and insight. This is not a one-size-fits-all thing. The tools, however, and the way of generating the hypotheses can be applied to multiple questions. And so what you're seeing now, you're seeing other laboratories and other groups identify other reflex circuits that control other aspects of immunity, innate and adaptive immunity in other organs and tissues. And this is what's been so exciting to watch because, you know, literally the sky's the limit. If you're interested in how a neural reflex might regulate a immune response, then you can formulate a hypothesis. What is the immune response you want to measure? Where does it occur in the body? Does that body part have an autonomic innervation, sympathetic or parasympathetic? And are you interested or can you manipulate the signals in those nerves to change the immunological output you're measuring? When you think it through that way, you can apply this logic to endless numbers of immune responses. So that's the power going forward. This is just the beginning. This is the tip of the iceberg. I think we've gained important credibility with this strategy. And now that we've showed it works in people, you can immediately jump to the next iteration of, well, if you can do it with a vagus nerve stimulation in the neck, can you activate the signals elsewhere in the body? My colleague, Sangeeta, working with Stavros Zanos here at the Feinstein Institute, they've now done a clinical trial using focused ultrasound to activate these anti-inflammatory pathways by insonicating the spleen. And they published that clinical trial. That's a first in human clinical trial. And that's really important. There's so much going on now. It would be hard to, we need another whole podcast to talk about all the things that are going on. Yes. And after reading the paper, that's not surprising. One can envision in the future, looking back at this time as a critical period where the options, the medical options for a wide range of disorders really changed. I think you're absolutely right. I think the possibility exists that this will represent a historic inflection in medicine. Future STEM talk topic. So Kevin, you propose that when the inflammatory reflex becomes out of whack, it could lead to toxicity, tissue damage, and the presence of cytokines. And even further, when the inflammatory reflex doesn't function well, it can lead to miscommunication among cytokines and lead to potential complications that we see in autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis. So I understand that testing your theory was a rather painstaking process. So can you tell us a little bit about that? The idea that the inflammatory reflex is a vagus nerve reflex is what we've been talking about. And it's clearly grounded in fact. But there's more facts. So we primarily study the signals traveling in the left vagus nerve because they seem to be enriched to the spline. But remember, in a human, there's 100,000 fibers on each side. In a mouse, it's a few thousand because obviously mice are smaller and have less nerves. But how many do you think are controlling the TNF? Maybe a few hundred in humans, maybe a few dozen in mice. It's a small fraction of all the signals. And so hold that thought that a small number of fibers control the TNF response. We don't know for sure. We know they're low threshold fibers. They can be activated with a very low threshold of current, which is why we are getting some seal activity, if you will. When we stimulate the whole vagus nerve trunk in the neck, we're not getting a plethora of side effects because we're only putting in a teeny amount of current. And the teeny amount of current is sufficient to activate the small number of fibers that turn off inflammation. So that was lucky, right? But when you really dive into what fibers are controlling what, we don't know the answer to most functions. So Steve Liberlis at Harvard has done some wonderfully elegant studies looking at labeling specific vagus nerve fibers. And in a cell paper he published a couple years ago, he showed that probably around 100 fibers control the breathing phase that cause inspiration or an inspiratory pause. And a different fiber said another 100 fibers or so control a different aspect of expiration. Now think of that. We have 100,000 fibers. So when you see on social media or in some online thing, blog or something, you want to stimulate your vagus nerve, I like to say, which ones? Which, you know, we got to be, we can't assume that vagus nerve stimulation is vagus nerve stimulation is vagus nerve stimulation. I mean, we can all walk and chew gum at the same time because different nerve fibers participate in different reflex circuits that enable you to do multiple things at the same time. So we're literally just at the beginning of understanding how to hack into specific fibers that only control TNF, only control heart rate, or only control breathing. Now, when you layer that knowledge, that understanding onto a diagnostic question, like, is my vagus nerve tone up or down? Well, now it gets really complicated. You know, we measure vagus nerve tone through heart rate variability. Well, is that the same as measuring the vagus nerve fibers to the spleen? I think not. You know, another way to measure vagus tone is through coronary artery blood flow during exercise. It gets very, very complicated. We don't today, we will someday, but as of today, we don't have great ways of measuring selective activities embedded in the vagus nerve to dissect these complex paradigms. So, Kevin, you talked about the fact that you have proof that electrical transmissions carried in the vagus nerve regulated TNF production by the immune system. And so we understand that you were so inspired by this idea that you drew a sketch at lunch one day of how treating inflammatory diseases using a bioelectronic device might be possible. Again, something that you've talked about a bit already, but the sketch piece is really interesting to us. So can you walk us through this Big Bang idea and the sketch that you drew? The Big Bang idea was that the inflammatory response is reflexively controlled. And the more I thought about this back in the early days of this journey, the more I thought about it, the more excited I become. I would wake up at night imagining how this must work. And in the midst of developing these ideas, this was back in the late 1990s, I went to lunch with the chairman of the board of the Feinstein Institute, Mr. Ralph Nappy. And we were sitting at a steakhouse not far from the lab on Northern Boulevard. And he said, well, how does it work? I said, well, Ralph, I think we figured out that the signals travel from the brain to the spleen through this nerve called the vagus nerve. So I sketched, I grabbed a napkin off the table and I sketched a brain with a vagus nerve and I sketched a spleen. And I said, Ralph, we injected endotoxin and the animals were making TNF in their spleen and in their blood because it's coming out of the spleen. And then we put an electrode and I drew a battery with a wire onto the vagus nerve in this sketch. I said, we put an electrode here in the neck and when we turned on the electricity, the TNF stopped. And I said, Ralph, I said, TNF is a drug target for these monoclonal antibodies you see advertised on the NFL football games. He goes, Kevin, you need to patent that. And I hadn't. I hadn't filed any patents at that time. And I said, okay, Ralph, I will. And that was pretty good advice. That was, that advice ranks up there with the advice my grandfather gave me when he said you should do something about that. I can see the value of that advice. And board chairs often think differently than us scientists and we're sometimes slow to come to what to them is an obvious next step. The idea of the patents enabled us to launch the company Setpoint Medical. The availability of the patents allowed us to do that company. And Setpoint Medical, I co-founded with my dear friend and colleague, Shaw Warren, a professor at Harvard Medical School. And Shaw and I worked on that company for many, many, many years. And if it wasn't for the patents that we had filed, which have now expired, by the way, if it wasn't for those patents, we wouldn't have been able to launch the company. And I remember, I remember that we were several years into this and I heard at a board meeting at the company that the first patient had been implanted with a vagus nerve stimulator. And I said to the chief medical officer, Ralph Zitnik, can I meet him? And Ralph said, you have to go to Bosnia. I said, done. So I flew to Sarajevo the week before Thanksgiving in 2011. And I met the patient. His name is Pero. And I asked him what happened. And he told me he had been bedridden, homebound with rheumatoid arthritis. In Bosnia then, they didn't have biologics, just methotrexate and steroids. He was unable to work. He couldn't play with his kids. And on Labor Day in 2011, he was implanted with a vagus nerve stimulator based on SetPoint's technology by a neurosurgeon from St. Louis, Rick Buchholz, who had flown over to do the surgery. And the patient told me, Pero told me within two weeks, he was up and around and he started playing tennis. And he, of course, he was deconditioned. So he got hurt. He injured his knee. Well, if you have a swollen knee, I don't have to tell your audience. That means in your end, a rheumatoid arthritis clinical trial, that means your score gets worse. So his doctors told him to take it easy, which is amazing, actually, if you think about it. They told him to take it easy after he had been homebound. So I flew home from Sarajevo. It was one of the happiest days of my professional life. And I resigned from the board of the company. And they asked me not to. And I said, you know, I didn't start this company to be a businessman or a board member. I started the company to get the answer to a scientific question. And I have the answer. It works. That's a great story. In 2016, you published another influential paper having, again, to do with how stimulation of the vagus nerve targeted the inflammatory reflex and thereby could modulate TNF production and reduce inflammation in humans. Could you talk a little bit about this paper? It was also, as I said, quite influential. And your paper, as I said, was in 2016. And since then, what have we learned about potential adverse effects as well? The paper in 2016 was the publication from the clinical trial that included PERO, the story you just heard. The trial was led by the company Setpoint Medical. The principal investigator was one of the world's leading rheumatologists, Paul Peter Tack, out of Amsterdam. So it was a multi-center trial. And it really, for the first time, answered two critically important questions, as you point out. The first question that Sangeeta and I had was, does the inflammatory reflex work in human beings? And so to answer that, the first part of that paper, we studied seven humans, seven people, who were having vagus nerve stimulators implanted because they had epilepsy. So vagus nerve stimulation has been used to treat epilepsy for many, many years. I think 17 or 18 years. It's been FDA approved in the U.S. So the question was that Sangeeta and I wanted to answer first was, if we implant a vagus nerve stimulator and turn it on, what happens to TNF production before and after we turn it on in these people? And so the surgeries were all done here at one of our Northwell hospitals by a neurosurgeon named Ash Mehta. And Sangeeta and her colleagues collected blood in the operating room before and after the surgery and brought it back to the lab where we measured the ability of the white blood cells in that blood to produce TNF when they were activated by endotoxin. And the results were striking. Before the vagus nerve stimulator was turned on, there was some background level or, you know, basal capability of the white blood cells to make TNF. But collecting white blood cells blood after the vagus nerve stimulator was turned on and repeating this showed that the influence of the vagus nerve stimulator stimulator was to reduce significantly how much TNF the white blood cells were capable of producing. So that was a big deal. That meant that it should be possible to block TNF not only in rheumatoid arthritis but in other conditions. And sure enough, in the remainder of that paper, when we looked at the results with Ralph Zitnik and Paul Peter Tack, and the first author was Frieda Koopman, who at the time was one of Paul Peter's students in the lab, and she's now a professor at AMC, I believe. When we looked at those results, the results were striking. The patients did significantly better. Their tender swollen joints improved. Some of them were able to decrease or be weaned off some of their medications. And I happen to know from long-term follow-up from discussions with a couple of those patients that they continue to do well many, many years later. And some of them, their only therapy for some of those patients is a vagus nerve stimulator. They don't need any other drugs. Wow. That paper, as we've mentioned a few times, was written in 2016. Have we learned since then anything about potential adverse effects or have there been none identified? I imagine there could be adverse effects, but I'd like to hear what you think. To date, we know a lot about the adverse effects of vagus nerve stimulation, and it's actually pretty good news. So if you look at the treatment of epilepsy or depression, it's also used to treat patients with severe depression in some centers, in those cases, the device is firing on for five minutes and off for five minutes pretty much continuously 24 hours a day. And the amount of current being delivered is quite high. It's on the order of five milliamps. In those patients, now there've been hundreds of thousands of patients with decades of experience with these, call this the maximal vagus nerve stimulation settings. Those patients do quite well. There have been 30-year follow-up studies of safety and efficacy, and those patients do quite well. Obviously, there's always the risk with any surgical incision of a wound infection. There's always the risk that a nerve or an artery could be inadvertently injured or damaged. There is the risk at these high current settings that the muscles of the vocal cords will buzz or twitch when the current is flowing. And there is the risk of muscle contractions in the face too. But those things happen in one or two percent of patients. It's arguably quite safe. And those risks are very well tolerated, especially in epilepsy, when you weigh the risk benefits against people with some people having dozens of seizures a day that are completely uncontrolled by medications. Now, that's only part of the story. We know now with the clinical trials that have been done by Setpoint, a couple things. First, they're not using five milliamps of current. They're using tenfold less, like 500 microamps. And so we don't know for sure yet because it's only been a few dozen or a few hundred patients, a few hundred patients studied so far. But I would, as a neuroscientist and neurosurgeon, I would say a tenfold less current is going to give you a lot less corollary side effects from leakage of current into muscles and other things. Second, and even perhaps most important, Yakov Levine, who was one of the early employees at Setpoint Medical, he was a former grad student in my lab, a brilliant biomedical engineer who studied a lot of immunology in my lab. Yakov discovered that you only have to stimulate one minute a day, not on for a minute, off for a minute, 24 hours a day, but a total of one minute a day. That's amazing. And so I've talked to some patients who are now being treated with this protocol from Setpoint clinical trials. And one woman I spoke to recently who is thrilled with her clinical outcome told me that she has it set so it treats her at night and she doesn't even wake up. It's amazing. And so in that particular protocol, it's one minute in a 24-hour period. Correct. As experience grows and other clinical trials are done, I expect we're going to see these clinical protocols applied to other conditions like multiple sclerosis and inflammatory bowel disease and other indications where the idea is to control damage from the immune system. But I also think someday, and I am not an insider on the company, I consult for Setpoint Medical, but I'm not on the board and I don't have inside information, but I would expect that interested clinicians, interested researchers will continue to explore the optimal settings and to potentially make the clinical benefits even better someday. That's exciting for sure. In several papers you've written about the vagus nerve, you've talked about how the vagus nerve can actually become out of tune. I have that in quotes. What causes the vagus nerve to become out of tune and what does it mean for a nerve to be out of tune? This is the point that Don and I began to explore a few minutes ago and I concluded that response by saying how complicated it is because you've got 200,000 vagus nerves. And so what does it mean when it's out of tune? I think there is a lot of information being battered around on social media, which frankly I find much of it to be very confusing because the question you're asking is the important one. What does it mean to have your vagus nerve in tune? If you break it down as a collection of important reflexes, each controlling important aspects of homeostasis by controlling important signals to important organs and cells, then you're going to have to go through this 200,000 fibers, one fiber at a time to answer your question. Now there's a tendency for people to lump things together. So if you have decreased heart rate variability, that's pretty good evidence. that your vagus nerve reflexes to your heart are not sending a lot of activity, right? Because when the vagus nerve fires, it prolongs the time to your next heartbeat. And that analysis is one of the cornerstones of how you assess heart rate variability. But I like to say that if you measure heart rate variability in patients with inflammation, you will often find that it's impaired. You will often find patients with serious inflammation and serious inflammatory conditions also have impaired vagus nerve activity or vagus nerve tone. Does that mean that the impaired vagus tone is allowing the excessive inflammation? Maybe. We don't know. It's very hard to answer that question, but the answer is maybe. And the reason I say maybe is because there's been a number of clinical studies done looking at patients' heart rate variability in siblings and other family members who are at risk for the same inflammatory condition but don't yet have that condition. And there's some very interesting studies. They're small, you know, 10, 20, 30 subjects. But they suggest it might be that the heart rate variability, the vagus nerve activity, is actually impaired before the onset of inflammation. And so it is possible that there's a correlation between heart rate variability and risk of inflammatory conditions, but we have improved causality. Thank you. That was a good explanation. So, Kevin, an important follow-up study that you spearheaded involved a dozen institutions from around the U.S., Italy, and Sweden. So you and your colleagues found that the dorsal motor nucleus is an important brainstem locus controlling anti-inflammatory signals in the inflammatory reflex. So it would be great if you could talk about this study, which was the first to demonstrate that neurons residing in the brainstem nuclei control the production of TNF in the spleen. We were fascinated by the idea that using optogenetics, it would be possible to go all the way upstream from the spleen, all the way up the vagus nerve, all the way to the origin of the vagus nerve in the brainstem to see if we could identify specific neurons controlling a specific behavior of the immune system, in this case, the specific activity of producing TNF. Now, we've all seen the movies of the rat with an electrode in its brain where the electrode fires and the rat pushes a lever or the electrode fires and the rat turns left or turns right, depending on where the electrode is placed. And so we wondered, maybe we could identify these neurons in the brain with these optogenetic methods because it is possible to put electrodes in brains and it is possible using deep brain stimulating technology to imagine a time when brain implants will be used to control immune responses. But to do that, you'd have to identify the neurons that are involved in turning off the inflammation. And so that was the genesis of the project. And when we did the experiments and we showed that putting light sensitive proteins into the cholinergic neurons of the dorsal motor nucleus, we could fire that laser in that brainstem of that mouse. And by recording the electrical signals on the splenic nerve, the nerve connecting the ganglia and the abdomen to the spleen, by recording the signals, we could see that for every flash of light in the brainstem, we could have a compound action potential, a spike of electrical activity in the splenic nerve that corresponded to the turning on of the light. So this was really important for understanding how the signals go from the brain to the spleen to turn off TNF. But there was something else really important about that experiment because it also means that the vagus nerve, which is parasympathetic, can control the splenic nerve, which is classified dogmatically as sympathetic. Now, the textbooks in your office say that the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system don't control each other, but this was clear proof that they can. And to nail that idea, we took pictures, which are published in that paper, that show the cholinergic parasympathetic vagus nerve fibers terminating on the origin of the sympathetic splenic nerve fibers in the ganglia that project into the spleen. So we're very excited about this. I'm frankly, I've been a little, you know, you asked earlier about the reaction to these stories. This has been a surprise to me. I think this is an incredibly important observation that has generated sort of minimal reaction from my colleagues. I think it's really important because it makes you think differently about this dogmatic idea that sympathetic and parasympathetic don't intersect. We prove they do. Fantastic, Kevin. And you and your colleagues at the Feinstein Institute also participated in a study that looked at the implant of a vagus nerve stimulator in a small group of patients with Crohn's disease. So Crohn's disease is a debilitating inflammatory condition affecting the gastrointestinal tract, and it doesn't have a cure that we know of yet. So the study involved more than 20 institutions from the Netherlands, Sweden, Croatia, Italy, and the U.S. So we'd like to know a little bit more about why you were so pleased with the results of this study. That study, as you say, was a multi-nation, multi-center trial. The principal investigator on that study was Michael Ebbardson, who was at that time at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, and a critical leader on that study was also, of course, Setpoint Medical that funded the study, and Yakov Levine had a significant hand, as well as David Chernoff, the current chief medical officer at Setpoint Medical. So it was a big, complicated study. What was so exciting to me about that trial was that it shows the possibility of using vagus nerve stimulation to treat Crohn's disease is very real. Now, Crohn's disease is a serious debilitating condition. It turns out after my mother died, when I was five, as we talked about, my father remarried Margie, my stepmother, who actually had serious Crohn's disease. So I came to know that illness very, very well through my stepmother. And what we know is the disease can be disabling, debilitating, and require multiple surgeries in many patients. And although, again, although biologics like anti-TNF, monoclonal anti-TNF, that I helped develop, we know that those can help a lot of patients. They don't help everybody. They don't work in everybody. So the idea that adding vagus nerve stimulation to the therapeutic armamentarium is really important and really gratifying. And the results were quite impressive from that first trial. They were very, very impressive. And in the long-term follow-up, there's some other interesting observations that are still being pursued scientifically. For instance, some of the patients who had vagus nerve stimulators implanted didn't get significantly better from the vagus nerve stimulator alone. But now when drugs that they had previously tried to no effect, when those drugs are added back in patients who now also have a vagus nerve stimulator, some of these people are having significant benefit. So it helps the drugs work better. And in some patients, having the vagus nerve stimulator alone is sufficient to allow them to stop taking all their other drugs completely. And there's some patients who have actually become quite famous writing about this and blogging about this. And one of whom I got to know very well, named Kelly Owens, actually gave me her cane. She no longer needs the cane she used to have to use to walk around. And it sits proudly in my office as one of my favorite gifts in my life. That's incredible. That's pretty poignant. You see it every day. It must be motivating. It is better than any prize or award that any scientist could imagine. You meet a patient who is living a normal life because of the work my colleagues and I did in the lab. That puts a smile on my face every time I see that cane. So, Kevin, you've been really pioneering bioelectronic medicine in many ways. And looking forward, I wonder what advances do you envision happening in the next decade or so? Scientists, as you know, hate to predict the future, but I'll take a stab at it in the context of the lily pads on the pond, knowing the doubling time of the pond lilies and knowing the surface area of the pond. You really can predict a future here because it's kind of established by what we already know. I predict a future where there will be dozens of clinical trials for probably perhaps dozens, but at least six or 10 new wearable or implantable devices that target the vagus nerve or other autonomic nerves, either in the neck, the brain, or the body to treat conditions ranging from inflammation to cancer to obesity to diabetes and even to other conditions like multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's. I think we're in a place now where we know how to use bioelectronic medicine to define mechanisms that can be probed and tested in people. Now, to understand that answer, I think it's important to define bioelectronic medicine as the convergence of devices controlling neural signals to control specific molecular mechanisms in the context of a specific disease. So, in the pharma industry, you know, you start to make a drug by picking a disease, finding a molecular target, and then screening millions of molecules against that target and then picking one and selling it. That's what the pharma industry is. In the bioelectronic medicine industry, you pick a disease. You have to have a mechanism and a target. It's not a random event to turn on electricity and see what happens. So, you pick a disease, you pick your target, then you work through neural signals that control that target through specific mechanisms, and then you build a device to hack into that nerve to control that target. And so, when you apply this to how the brain works, you can actually think about restoring movement and quadriplegics and even sensation, which is something that we're doing in patients here at the Feinstein Institute already. So, I think we're living in a revolutionary time where we will be able to harness the power of neuroscience, physiology, and immunology in ways that were unimaginable even a few years ago. Yes, it's certainly exciting. Earlier, you mentioned the pharmaceutical industry, and they're probably keeping a close eye on this whole approach. I'm sure they are. And I know that in my conversations with many leaders in the pharma industry, they uniformly applaud this approach and support it as a way of helping patients feel better, which is their stated mission. And I expect, I fully expect, that the pharma industry will turn significant resources into these basic discoveries and basic ideas with an eye towards harnessing the power of bioelectronic medicine to add to their ability to have products that help people. Yes, not only with respect to the development of future pharmaceuticals, but they may, in fact, work in this area directly in bioelectronic medicine, I imagine. Some of these companies are quite diverse. One hundred percent. Some of these companies are already making major investments in bioelectronic medicine. I would think so. So, Kevin, you're the president and CEO of the Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research at Northwell Health, which is the largest health care provider in New York. You have 50 research labs and more than 5,000 researchers and staff on board. And these researchers are publishing around 2,700 papers a year, which is very impressive. And there's a quote of yours on the website that reads, we are scientists, physicians, clinicians, innovators, and entrepreneurs working together to produce tomorrow's cures today. Can you talk about your research center and then also talk to us about the range of work that goes on there? The Feinstein Institutes at Northwell Health is a major research home for, as you said, the largest health care provider in New York City and state. Northwell sees 2 million patients a year, and we have built a research home for our clinicians and for our full-time researchers in order to harness the power embedded in that clinical experience and in the clinical expertise of our faculty and staff. So, the way we've organized the Feinstein Institutes is around five institutes that focus in specific areas of interest. These five institutes come together around a shared common mission of producing knowledge to cure disease, which is a mission statement that we're extraordinarily proud of. We do research ranging all the way from sophisticated genomics, data analytics, and sequencing, all the way up to complex physiological and mechanistic studies in animals, and all the way up to advanced clinical trials in all of our areas of expertise. We have about 100 principal investigators now. 8,000 Northwell employees take the Citi test, which is the federally designated research requirement. So, 8,000 people are either full-time or part-time researchers. About 1,000, we estimate, are full-time, and they are supported by a significant portfolio from the National Institutes of Health, New York State, DOD, DARPA, and a number of foundations and strategic partnerships. It's a large research effort that is focused on a singular mission of producing knowledge to cure disease. We have an important collaboration in our Cancer Institute with the Cold Spring Harbor Lab, which is about 10 miles from here as the crow flies. We have deep expertise in immunology, neuroscience, molecular medicine. We have a major research institute in bioelectronic medicine, as you might imagine. We also have expertise in health system sciences, big data analytics, behavioral health, where we are some of the leading research programs in the country, if not the world, in schizophrenia. And so, all these institutions work seamlessly together in a collaborative way. We like to say that at the Feinstein Institutes, across all of our institutes, collaboration is required, not only internally, but also externally. So, it's a busy place. We do a lot of work, and we're very focused on trying to make discoveries that are not only scientifically interesting, but at the end of the day, will help people. So, excuse me, sounds like a wonderful place. You are the inventor of more than 120 U.S. patents. Who knew that the curious kid who rather mischievously removed the engine out of an automobile would become such an inventor? Since you say that you are still, to this very day, really a tinkerer, do you have any secret contraptions? Of course, after you tell us, they won't be secret, but secret contraptions that you're working on or imagining. What is the nature of your tinkering? Well, as you said, I could tell you, but then I'd have to, you know. The secrets are safe, because I won't tell you. At home, I tinker in my workshop. I have a barn in the back, and I love to do woodworking. I love to build cabinets and furniture. I love to tinker on whatever's broken around the house. I have four daughters, and they all now have stuff that gets broken in their houses and apartments. So, I love to tinker around my shop at home. I mean, in the lab, we're still tinkering on the next phase of this journey, on this intersection of the brain and the immune system. And I'm fascinated, and we will soon be submitting papers for publication, and if any of my future reviewers are listening to your show, please go easy on us, will you? We are really fascinated by how neural networks in the brain store memories of inflammatory conditions in the body, and how reactivation of those memories can reactivate the inflammation in the body. I think this is a major, a major new way of thinking about brain-body immune interactions, and we're deep in thinking about that, and that's what we're tinkering with now. That's exciting, and that's something I hadn't heard of before, really, the idea of the brain's neural networks storing, in a sense, a memory or a representation of this previous inflammatory episode. Yeah, the leader in this space now is Professor Rolls, R-O-L-L-S, out of Israel. She's done some incredible work showing exactly what you just said. We've now replicated her seminal findings, and we are moving to understand how specific molecules in the body can form specific memories or engrams in the brain, which can recapitulate the effect of those molecules. Her work's also been replicated by two major New York laboratories, one at Rockefeller, Jeff Friedman's laboratory, and another at Columbia, Charlie Zucker's laboratory. So there's what I said before. This is one of the hottest fields, if not the hottest field in all of science, because understanding how the brain... I mean, look, we all know that the college kid studies for their exam for two weeks, gets tired, takes the exam, and gets sick the next day. How does that work, right? We all know it's true, but how does your brain influence your immune system? And I think we're now positioned to figure that out. Really exciting. So, Kevin, just super exciting work. So as if 120 patents weren't enough, you've also authored more than 450 papers, and that's quite an output. So now we have a question for you. Do you ever find time to play golf anymore? When my oldest daughter was born, I gave up golf. I haven't played in many, many years, and I haven't missed it. You know, I love my work, I love my family, and I try to maintain some sense of balance between family work, health and hobbies, and community giving back to the community. And, you know, those are hard... Maintaining balance is one of the... I think maintaining balance in today's world is one of the hardest things to do. So golf went out the door. But about those 450 papers, it's really... I counted my co-authors, and no one writes 450 papers alone. And I didn't. And no one can believe when I tell them that when I counted, I had 1,100 co-authors. So, I mean, it's over many decades. And that's something that I would urge young people thinking about careers in science to just embrace the decades. The decades are decades full of exploration and discovery and friendships and growth. And the amount of time good things take shouldn't scare people away. It should attract them into it. And so over the decades, I've been so fortunate to work with so many brilliant colleagues, at least 1,100 that I've published with. And hopefully in the coming years, another 100 or two more. We'll have to see what happens. I share that perspective as a person of a certain experience. So I think we are well aligned on that. We're both avoiding the age word here. I applaud that. Experience is good. Well, I think that's fantastic advice. And Kevin, it's been so fantastic having you on the podcast today. Thank you so much for joining us. Thank you for having me. I've really enjoyed this conversation. I look forward to following this show and with you and many of your future episodes to come. Well, thanks, Kevin. You were great. Appreciate you coming on. Well, that was just a fantastic discussion with Kevin. Just such important work that he and his lab are doing at this time. Just really exciting to follow the work they're doing. And I really like what Kevin said about how his lab is working to, this is a quote, produce tomorrow's cures today. The potential of bioelectronic medicine to use electrical stimulation to treat things like inflammation and other disorders is one of the most exciting developments that we are seeing in healthcare today. And I really enjoy this discussion with Kevin. We hear the word pioneer often used in science, and sometimes it's a little bit of a stretch. But in this case, it's clear that Kevin is indeed a pioneer in this field. And to think that we're on the verge of treating all kinds of disorders with devices that require a battery rather than a pill or a surgery, this is quite exciting. I absolutely agree with you, Ken. If you enjoyed this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the STEM Talk webpage where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes at STEMtalk.us. This is Dawn Cornegas signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on STEM Talk. Thank you for listening to STEM Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, STEMtalk.us. There you can also find more information about the guests we interview.