 Welcome to STEM Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hello, I'm your host, Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all of the guests who appear on STEM Talk. Today, we have Dr. Rudy Tanzi, who is best known for co-discovering all three familiar early-onset Alzheimer's disease genes. In addition, Rudy's lab was the first to use human stem cells to create three-dimensional human brain organoids and three-dimensional neural gallial culture models of Alzheimer's disease, which became known as Alzheimer's in a dish. Better wash that dish. These models were the first to recapitulate all three key Alzheimer's disease pathological hallmarks and have made drug screening faster and cheaper. Rudy is the director of the Genetics and Aging Research Unit, as well as the director of the Henry and Allison McCants Center for Brain Health. Rudy is also co-director of the Massachusetts General Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease at Massachusetts General Hospital and serves as the Joseph P. and Rose F. Kennedy Professor of Neurology at Harvard Medical School. Rudy has published more than 700 research papers and is one of the top 50 most cited neuroscientists in the world. He is author of Decoding Darkness and co-author of two books with Deepak Chopra, Superbrain and The Healing Self. Before we get into our interview with Rudy, however, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to STEM Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the wittiest and most lavishly praise-filled reviews to read on STEM Talk. If you hear your review read on STEM Talk, just contact us at STEMtalk at IHMC.us to claim your official STEM Talk t-shirt, and then you will be the cool person. Today, our winning review comes from a listener named Sean. It reads, What a great review, Sean. And thanks to all our other STEM Talk listeners who have helped STEM Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now on to today's interview with Dr. Rudy Tansey. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. Hello. Welcome to STEM Talk. I'm your host, Ken Ford. Rudy, welcome to STEM Talk. Thanks. Happy to be here. I'm very glad you're here as well. I understand that you were quite the curious child and started playing the accordion when you were just seven years old. Your dad, however, walked into the room one day and threw a Jimmy Smith album on your table and offered you some advice. So what did he say? Well, you know, I grew up in Rhode Island in an Italian community where, you know, you're a kid and you play accordion. I actually liked the accordion. And my father was a jazz fan, so he gave me a Jimmy Smith Hammond B3 jazz organ album. And he said, do you want to keep playing accordion? And I said, yeah, I like it. And he said, okay, maybe we'll get you a monkey in a cup, too. And then I listened to the album and I'm like, wow, this is the same type of organ that I hear in all the bands I was listening to back then. Like, you know, yes, and Santana and, you know, others. And I said, yeah, I think I want to play organ. And so my father set me up with first portable organs. And then by the time I was 15, I had a Hammond B3. And to this day, on the side, I play that Hammond B3 professionally with rock bands like Aerosmith and others in the studio. Not gigging, just the studio. What kind of accordion were you studying? Oh, I don't remember the exact brand. A keyboard accordion or a button accordion? No, no, no. It was a keyboard accordion with buttons on the left. Right. Keyboard on the right. And it was 120 bass, you know, standard. You know. I would love to get one again now. It's such a beautiful instrument. I like the Cajun accordions, you know, the Deitonic accordions like they use there. I had one custom made, but I don't play it enough to be proficient. Oh, I would have no idea how to play that. You mentioned Jimmy Smith, or I mentioned Jimmy Smith. And he really, really helped to popularize, as you know, the Hammond B3. And for our listeners, the Hammond B3, when paired up with a Leslie speaker, is still a unique sound that hasn't really been replicated by synthesizers, at least to my taste. It just doesn't sound quite the same. No, I mean, I do have probably the best Hammond B3 facsimile in a synthesizer, which is the Nord, N-O-R-D, but it's still not the same. But, you know, any classic rock guitar player, and I played with Richie Blackmore from Deep Purple. I've done albums, three albums with Joe Perry from Aerosmith. I did an Aerosmith album, two solo albums with Joe and others. And, you know, rock guitarists love to have the Hammond B3 behind them. Yes. You listen to great guitarists like David Gilmore from Pink Floyd or Mark Norfolk from Dire Straits. The main keyboard, the main thing you hear behind them is the Hammond B3. It's just a match made in heaven. Yes, it's a unique sound in my view. So, Rudy, as a youth, you were also interested in science and medicine. And I heard, perhaps from one of those proverbial little birdies, that you participated back then in what was known as the Westinghouse Science Talent Search. I remember that. How was your experience with that? Well, I didn't win a prize. I got honorable mention. But it's weird because the project I picked ended up being relevant to my research much later. I was speculating that in diabetic hypertensive retinopathy, patients who have diabetes with hypertension, that the reason why they had degeneration of the retina was that the iron in the blood was a reactive metal and causing oxidative damage in the eye. And I just speculated on this as a kid. I was, I don't know, 16, 17 years old. And it turns out that's probably true. But at the time, because it was just shameless speculation and my data was just purely empirical based on case studies, it wasn't really hypothesis-driven, mechanism-based science. You know, it didn't win a prize. But to this day, I still study reactive metals and oxidative stress and its role in inflammation and diseases like Alzheimer's, which is my main topic of study. That is interesting and prescient for one so young to hypothesize anything about that topic, in my view. You mentioned you're from Rhode Island. I understand that you're from Cranston, Rhode Island. I am, you know. And I mean, you would never be able to do this today because of HIPAA and security rules. But my parents started the first out-service medical transcription company. And so they would have hospitals in Rhode Island and Massachusetts, including Mass General, you know, send the recordings of the doctors on their cases and they would type them up. And my job as a kid was to photocopy those reports. And, of course, I would read them. And it was actually reading through the reports that I got the idea for the Western Health Science Talent Search. Today, I'm sure you wouldn't even be able to say you read those reports, but that was a long time ago. My wife is also from Cranston, Rhode Island. I think the opposite side of Cranston. She's Cranston West. Oh, they're, well, they're our rivals. Yeah. Cranston East. Cranston East Thunderbolts versus Cranston West Falcons. They're a great rival. And I'm from East Greenwich. So it's. Well, I went to school in East Greenwich originally, actually. I went to Rocky Hill. Oh, yes. Back to the day. I know Rocky Hill. Yeah, I went to Rocky Hill from fifth to ninth grade and actually still stay in touch with them and support the school. That school, more than any other, really shaped my academic career. And then I went to public school, back to public school after Rocky Hill just because of this. It was a long commute from my parents. Yeah. Yeah. Rocky Hill has shaped many lives in a positive direction. So after high school, how did you end up at the University of Rochester? What was the connection there that made that happen? Well, at the time, and this was 76, the idea of genetic engineering and recombinant DNA and gene splicing, terms we hardly even use anymore, like gene splicing and genetic engineering, was just coming to the fore. And Rochester had really the greatest concentration of pioneers in that area, like Fred Sherman and Gary Wilson, Harry Tabor, Frank Young, Saeed Azain. And that's what I wanted to do. I had this romantic notion that I was going to be a geneticist doing this new genetics and gene splicing. And at that same time, there was a ban on this type of research in Cambridge. Because when it first came out, I guess the folks who ran Cambridge thought that it might lead to Frankenstein. So at Harvard, there was a ban for a while on this type of research. And it all worked out well because I got waitlisted at Harvard and decided, well, I was upset that I got waitlisted. And I decided not to be on the waitlist. And I said, I'll go to the University of Rochester. They have better genetics curriculum there anyway. That makes perfect sense. As I understand it, your grandfather had died when he was only 45 years old and your father was only 17. And then your father died when he was 45 and you were 17. That's amazing. Did that kind of motivate you toward a study of genetics and that line of work? You know, probably hereditary risk factors associated with heart disease was passed from one generation to the next. Was this one of your motivations? You know, I can't say it was. I was scared to death. And in my 20s, I was proactive and already went to go see my late 20s a cardiologist. And as soon as I could check out my own genetic risk factors, I did. And I very proactively take care of my own cardiovascular health to offset the risk, you know, conferred through the generations from my grandfather to father. But no, it didn't. I mean, it's interesting. Even Alzheimer's. My grandmother got Alzheimer's disease after I decided to study Alzheimer's. So it wasn't inspiring me either. Well, they both are fruitful things to study in so many ways. Earlier, you mentioned being sort of slightly annoyed with Harvard for waitlisting you. But you ended up going to Harvard Medical School for a PhD. How did you decide to forgive them? And how has this all worked out? Well, I mean, so what really happened was I don't know if we're going to talk about the work I did with Tim Gosella on Huntington's. We will indeed. Yeah. But so it was after that work, I was actually going to go to Yale for human genetics. And I applied to Yale and I got in and I was going to go there. And then some folks who, like Joe Martin, who was the chair of our department at Mass General, and Jim Gosella, who was my mentor, said, you know lots of the newest human genetics already. In fact, we had the chair of Yale's human genetics come to learn from us and you taught them this new human genetics stuff that we're doing. Why don't you apply genetics or something else? And they convinced me to wait a year and instead apply for neuroscience programs. And Harvard had one of the best neuroscience programs. It was weird because back then, you know, it wasn't like a system like we do now. I only applied to Yale when I wanted to go to human genetics. And then when I decided to delay a year, I only applied to Harvard for the neuroscience program. You know, nowadays you'd apply to 50 different schools and make sure you have your backups. Back then it was just going, OK, I'm going to go to Yale. OK, I'm going to go to Harvard. I think it was a little simpler back then. So, yeah, so that was I really, you know, wanted. And I'm pretty sure when I worked with Jim Gosella that I coined the term neurogenetics because I can't find any reference to it being used before I named Jim Gosella's lab at Mass General the neurogenetics lab, mainly so that we would get our deliveries delivered to us and not to the general genetics department at Mass General Hospital. And so I so I may have actually invented the word neurogenetics and I call myself a neurogeneticist today. Well, it's a pithy term. And speaking of Jim Gosella, this is a perfect segue. As I understand it, this was 1983 or about then, and you're around 20 years old at Mass General working with him. And you were part of a group of researchers that were the first ones to discover a specific disease gene. Family studies at the time had showed that Huntington's disease gene was linked to a polymorphic DNA marker that maps to human chromosome four. This is really interesting. Yeah, well, if you move back, it was actually 1980. Oh, even earlier. 1980, I was playing in a band to make side money and I was playing at a club near Mass General and we stayed at that hotel all night. And I said, what am I doing? I need to get serious about my life. Just can't just have fun playing with a band. And I went to Mass General to look for the job board, you know, human resources were closed. And there was this job, you know, that included recombinant DNA and southern blots and, you know, all the stuff that not like a handful of people in the world know how to do. These very customized genetic engineering protocols, you know, transferring DNA by southern blots and purifying restriction enzymes to cut DNA to find DNA variants and polymorphisms. So it turned out that Jim Gusella, who at the time was 25, I was 20, he was finishing his PhD at MIT with David Hausman. And he had figured out how to find single copy pieces of DNA that could be markers in the genome. And the idea was to use those to find a disease gene, which is mundane now, but it had never been done. And he was looking for a postdoc to set up his lab. And I somehow convinced him to hire me. And he hired me on my birthday, which was September 18th, a couple of days ago. He just had my birthday. And on my birthday, I got that job. And I was so excited. And then, you know, we, you know, I wrote this book called Decoding Darkness in the first chapter of it. It's mainly about Alzheimer's, but the first chapter is how you couldn't buy anything back then to do human genetics research. You had to jerry-rig everything. I mean, we would go to Walmart or Kmart and just pick out household stuff and jerry-rig it to do everything we had to do. They were glorious times. You had to be MacGyver, you know, and just figure out how to get DNA transferred and from gels. And we found the first dozen DNA variants ever in the human genome. Picked them out randomly. Now there's 70 million of them now. And we got extremely lucky in that we pulled out 23 pieces of hay, I mean, 12 pieces of hay from 23 haystacks. And we found the needle. The needle being the variant that co-segregated with Huntington's disease. We found the Huntington's gene in miraculous time against all odds. And Jim became known as Lucky Jim for that. And that really, that single study published in Nature, first time a disease gene was found using genetics, really then stimulated the entire human genome project and the excitement that we could use genetics to figure out diseases that were otherwise completely mysterious. And for that reason, I nominate Jim Gosella every year. The Nobel Prize Committee asked me to nominate someone. And I nominate every year Jim Gosella. And I hope for one day, they'll see that he's the guy who really stimulated the genetics revolution in human genetics. And I was just happy to be the hands and be a part of it. That's a great story. And thank you for sharing it. Let's move forward now to 1987. When you discovered the first Alzheimer's gene, you named it amyloid precursor protein, or APP, because it essentially makes amyloid. And the mutations in that gene cause a rare form of early onset Alzheimer's with near certainty by making too much amyloid in the brain, as I understand it. So now we know that amyloid is something that can occur in the brain a decade or two, perhaps, before symptoms. Can you tell us about the paper that came out in Science that detailed this discovery? So going back to when I was going to go to Yale for genetics, in advance of that, I was already prepping to do my genetics thesis at Yale, which I then instead did at Harvard. But now it had to be more neuroscience-based. I was in the neuroscience program. That was a year later. So I decided that I was going to use genetic variants on chromosome 21. I was going to build the first end-to-end genetic linkage map of a human chromosome. And I picked chromosome 21 because it's the smallest. And I would get done the fastest. And then, of course, chromosome 21 is present in three copies rather than the normal two copies in Down syndrome subjects. And when I read in Science Magazine a News and Views article by Gene Marks that said Down syndrome subjects or patients inevitably get amyloid plaques and Alzheimer's pathology by middle age, I speculated there would be an Alzheimer's gene. There was no Alzheimer's gene known yet. It would be on chromosome 21. And since the Down syndrome patients got amyloid first, I speculated there'd be a gene on chromosome 21 that was going to make the amyloid and it was going to cause Alzheimer's. And when I brought that to the department heads at Harvard in the neurobiology department, I said, I want to do this for my thesis. They said, that is just shameless speculation upon shameless speculation. You're a student. You've got to be safer than that. That's way too high risk. No. And, you know, I was a stubborn kid who played in a rock band and I said, well, I'm going to do it. And I found a Down syndrome lab at Children's Hospital with David Kernit, the late David Kernit. And he allowed me to do that in his lab. So here I am. Ironically, I isolate the first. It turned out to be right. The gene was on 21. It made amyloid. I named it amyloid precursor protein. To this day now, amyloid is now agreed upon to be the cause of the disease. It was the first Alzheimer's gene. But ironically, the first Alzheimer's disease gene was isolated at Children's Hospital in Boston because of the link to Down syndrome. That's another really interesting story. It illustrates how one couldn't have really planned for that sequence. You know, you seem to have taken advantage of, in a good way, of the opportunities that life presented to you. And it's a path that one couldn't map out beforehand. Yeah, I think my mantra in science from the very beginning was regarding the word research. Some folks emphasize the word re, meaning go back to what's already been done and replicate it and incrementally advance it. I've always been much more ambitious about emphasizing the word search and wanting to do something new, out of the box, not being afraid to take risks. And, you know, within reason, you have to have a career. You can't do totally crazy stuff. But, you know, but that's been basically the story of my entire career is high risk, high reward projects, including my very first project I did for my doctoral thesis at Harvard, which is to find that first Alzheimer's gene. Yes, that does sound like a risky thesis project. And I'm very happy for you that it worked out well. In your book, Decoding Darkness, you write that few real nightmares on Earth can compare to the terror wrought by Alzheimer's disease. That's certainly true. Many of us have seen it in our own families or relatives. Can you give people a sense of the book? I mean, it has the title is also a really appropriate title, I think. Can you tell us a little bit about your book? Yeah, well, Decoding Darkness was my first book. And the three books I wrote after that were all New York Times bestsellers. Decoding Darkness did not sell that great because, you know, it was a little bit more scientific. But it was my favorite book. And it was meant to tell the story about how we found the Alzheimer's disease genes and the real stories, the politics, the soap operas, the serendipity, the mistakes that turned into discoveries. You know, it's meant to show that discovery is never a straight line. And I hate when people apply revisionist history, create a neat story. And instead of telling the real story of how you got to the truth through a jagged zigzag line full of mistakes, they try to just then, you know, homogenize it and sterilize it and make it look like everything just worked out just right. Here was the hypothesis and then this work. And I said, you know, I'm going to write this book and I'm going to interview everybody, friends and not so friends of mine in the field to all have their say to say, how did we really find these disease genes, these Alzheimer's genes? And it's a much better story that way. And, you know, there are embarrassments and there are mistakes and there was deep dark side of the soul involved. But, you know, I think especially young budding scientists need to know it's OK to make mistakes. And as long as you learn from them, don't obsess on them and move forward. That's a great message. We have a large audience of young scientists, postdocs and PhD and MD students to listen to the podcast. And that's one of the reasons we talk about people's life course, because it's never a straight line and there's a lot of serendipity involved. And I'm glad you talked about that. And your book sounds wonderful. As people age, we become more prone to memory lapses. I mean, I think everyone is aware of that. I've heard you say, I believe, that memory loss, as well as some diminishing of our general cognitive abilities, sort of inevitably comes along as we age. In the same sense as a 65-year-old, or in my case, a 69-year-old can't play basketball anymore with young people, perhaps college students. It just wouldn't work out for me. But when people start to have memory lapses, they typically nervously sort of obsess about whether they've got the Alzheimer's gene or whether Alzheimer's is in their future. Based on how long a person lives, however, only 5% of Alzheimer's genes guarantee the disease. 95% predispose the person to Alzheimer's, which means that lifestyle must have an awful lot to do with avoiding the disease or kicking it down the road a ways. Can you tell us more about this? Yeah. So the three early-onset Alzheimer's disease genes, all of which I was involved with discovering, the first one was the amyloid precursor protein APP, and then presenolone 1 and presenolone 2. Those two latter genes make the enzyme that cuts APP to create the amyloid. So you have the substrate and the enzymes. And those mutations, unfortunately, guarantee Alzheimer's disease by 60 years old, often under 50 years old. But they're rare. There may be 2% of cases. And then you have an Alzheimer's gene called APOE, which is the most common late-onset risk factor. And about 2% of the population have two copies of APOE4, which dramatically increases risk by about 14-fold, but doesn't guarantee the disease. It does seem to guarantee that you'll get the pathology in the brain in a normal lifespan. But once you get the amyloid pathology and onto the tangles and the inflammation, you know, it can take a decade, two or three before you get symptoms. So, you know, I like to think of APOE4 homozygotes, the double copy, as pretty much a guarantee for the pathology. But it comes later in life so that you may pass away of other causes before it transforms into clinical symptoms of the disease. So that's that 5% number where you have the guaranteed pathology and then if you live long enough, guaranteed disease. But the vast majority of the new Alzheimer's genes, including the ones we have found since then, and there are now almost 100 of them, all control neuroinflammation. Inflammation is the biggest killer of neurons and synapses in the brain. And as we age, inflammation becomes more and more rampant throughout the body. So I played, you know, basketball. I played soccer in college. I played basketball while I was a scientist. I played for 30 years, five hours a week, full-quart ball, right up until the pandemic. And, you know, my knees got shot from that. And I'm getting a knee replacement. Five days from now, I'm going to get my right knee, total knee replacement. Five days from this interview. Not looking forward to that. But what I'm saying is that inflammation not only hits the body and our knees and is rear and tear there, but it hits the brain, your lifestyle, the amount of sleep you get, the quality of your diet, your exercising. All these things affect the rate of neuroinflammation in your brain. And, you know, everybody, a lot of people experience brain fog, as we call it with COVID. That was neuroinflammation. And so you can get a sense of how intense inflammation can cause brain fog or confusion, you know, even if it's temporary. But this happens at a chronic and subclinical level in most people. And then they suddenly don't have the bandwidth to remember everything. And, you know, they get stressed out because they can't be like Google and remember every single name. And frankly, you know, in past generations, people didn't expect to memorize everything. But now because we have social media and we're constantly on Google and now AI tools that can tell us everything we need to know, we expect to be the same thing. We expect to be Mr. Google and AI. And we put so much pressure on ourselves to maintain and retain and recall so much information. We stress ourselves out. That causes more inflammation in the brain. So, you know, there's a difference between that and actually onset of Alzheimer's disease is what I want to say. That makes sense. And, you know, you and others have been quoted as saying that people age prematurely when they stop learning new things. And just in everyday life, we sort of see that, you know, some folks, when they retire, for example, don't take up challenging new activities. They sort of just don't. And they do seem to age very quickly. And I've heard you argue that the harder something is to learn, the better it is for your aging brain. Something challenging. We've had other guests on STEM Talk that talked about this topic. One was a strong advocate for things like dance or learning a foreign language, things that are relatively challenging. Could you tell us more about that? Well, if you ask what leads to cognitive decline with age and in a more serious way, what determines the degree of dementia once Alzheimer's disease begins? The answer is the same. It's the loss of synapses. So here you are with 100 billion neurons and trillions of synapses, maybe tens of trillions. And inflammation and acute attacks on the brain due to aging and how you're living your life, including genetics, you know, 60 different Alzheimer's genes that determine your threshold for neuroinflammation. Well, neuroinflammation removes synapses. So inevitably, as you age, synapses get lost. So it's our job to—it's kind of like money coming out of your bank account. If you have too much money coming out of your bank account, what do you do? You make money and save money. The comparison for that in the brain is you need to make more synapses so that you have synaptic reserve, like reserves in the bank, reserves in the brain. Because the more synapses you make, the more you can lose before you get into trouble. So the way you build up synapses in the brain is very simple. You learn new things. The more things you try to learn. And it doesn't always have to be something like intense, like a new language or a new musical instrument. It could be a new hobby. It could be watching documentaries or reading nonfiction books and learning new things. As long as you're learning something new, you're making new synapses. And all learning is based on association with what you already know. So when you make new synapses, as you learn new things, they connect with existing synapses because the new information is being associated with the older information that's already in synapses, already integrated in your neural network. So you're not only reinforcing your neural network and the synapses you have, you're building new ones and creating new pathways around that. And those pathways create resilience. So when we talk about resilience as we age, there's two forms of resilience. One is that, you know, despite aging and the onset of pathology, you remain cognitively intact. That could be because you have a good diet that limits inflammation. But it could also be that despite the inflammation, you've made so many new synapses by learning new things that you can afford to lose more than most people before you get into trouble. That's a great way of describing it, I think. You know, we've been talking now about some of the genetic basis for Alzheimer's. And when you first started looking into Alzheimer's in the 1980s, not much was known. And it seems like we've come a long ways in many ways. And yet there are many mysteries still remaining regarding Alzheimer's. I wondered if you could give us just a quick squirt about what you see as the principal advances. And as I said, we've discussed some of them, the genetic basis for Alzheimer's. And could you tell us what you see as the biggest mysteries regarding Alzheimer's? You know, there must be some fascinating questions that you want to ask and resolve in the next few years. To be really honest, a lot of the mystery has been solved. The media still tends to want to create controversy and debate because that's what sells papers and gets you clickbait on the internet. But it's now pretty clear. And this is what genetics taught us. The first gene said amyloid plaques, the amyloid deposition, beta amyloid, the sticky material, causes the disease. And then we had two decades of confusion and debate because when we put those early onset Alzheimer's genes that we and others discovered, the APP, the presynolins, we put those mutations into mice. They would make amyloid and eventually there'd be enough neuroinflammation to get the synapse loss and they'd have cognitive issues. But the mice did not make the other key feature of Alzheimer's disease, the neurofibrillary tangles, these filaments of twisted filaments of the tau protein that accumulate inside of neurons. And kill them from within. So people said, how can amyloid cause the disease? All you geneticists who say amyloid causes the disease, how can it be if the mice don't get tangles? Fast forwarding, guess what? We now know. Mice cannot make tangles. They have the wrong forms of the tau protein. So a lot of much to do about nothing. But it did lead to massive debates about whether it's plaques or tangles. Mice just, now we know that mice don't have the right forms of the tau protein to make the tangles. And so the big breakthrough came in 2014 when we created Alzheimer's in a dish. We created a 3D human neurocell culture where we're growing human neurons in a gel-like matrix that mimic the brain. We put in the mutations. So now they're human neurons making amyloid in a gel-like matrix that mimic the brain. And sure enough, in that system, in four weeks, you've got amyloid plaques. Wait another week or two, and you've got the tangles. Block the plaques in the amyloid. Then you don't get the tangles. So that was the first proof of concept physically that said amyloid does cause tangles if you finally do it in a human system, in that first human 3D cultural model of Alzheimer's disease. We published that in Nature in 2014. And that kind of rested the debate. But then there was a new controversy. People said, okay, amyloid can cause tangles. And yes, the genetics say that amyloid causes this disease. But wait a minute. We had all these clinical trials in patients, and we lowered the amyloid, but they didn't get better. And that caused more controversy and debate, especially in the newspapers. Oh, they're wasting your tax dollars chasing amyloid. No. Here's the fact. Amyloid is to Alzheimer's disease, as cholesterol is to heart disease. Just like Brown and Goldstein won a Nobel Prize for studying an early onset family with heart disease, with a rare mutation that was fully penetrant, guaranteed the disease, and that mutation was in the LDL receptor, and it increased cholesterol. Did that mean that, oh, if a patient has congestive heart failure and needs a bypass, all we have to do is lower their cholesterol? No. The early onset fully penetrant mutations in genetics teach you what to prevent, not what to treat. Those mutations we first discovered in the 80s and 90s, and the early onset genes said amyloid comes early. It takes then one, two, or three decades for that cascade to finish before you have enough neuroinflammation to cause enough cell death and synapses loss to get the disease. By that time, simply hitting the amyloid is a decade or two or three too late. So I like to say the genetics taught us that amyloid is a match that lights the brush fires of tangles that spread and propagate. What can strike the match? Genetics, infection, air pollution, all kinds of things. Once you have the brush fires of tangles, not until they trigger the large forest fires of neuroinflammation do you finally have enough cell death and synapses loss to get this disease. So it's no surprise that the majority of late-onset Alzheimer's disease susceptibility genes that increase your risk but don't guarantee the disease control neuroinflammation in the brain. And it was my lab that discovered the first Alzheimer's neuroinflammation gene as well back in 2008. STEM Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, locomotion, healthspan, resilience, and performance. I remember the 2014 paper when that came out in Nature, I think it was. And you mentioned it earlier. That had a huge splash. I remember people that weren't even working in the field and, you know, having anything to do with Alzheimer's were sharing the paper. And I know that you received a lot of attention for that paper. There was a write-up in Time about it. You know, Time puts out this list of 100 most influential people. And Rhea Shriver wrote a really very nice little blurb about your work. I thought it was very nicely done. Yeah, it was kind of fun to get on that 100. Most fun about getting on the Time 100 list was going to the Time 100 gala and, you know, getting to meet the other people on the list that year. And Christopher Nolan, my favorite movie maker, was on the list. And I just, you know, kind of pigeonholed him at the bar and was talking about Interstellar and all his movies, probably to the point that he got a little tired of me. But that was a lot of fun. And, you know, to think about the Alzheimer's in a Dish, this culture model, it did two things. It basically validated the amyloid hypothesis that says, yes, amyloid does cause the tangles and then that causes the cell death. And the combination of the amyloid and cell death triggers the neuroinflammation, starting with the microglial cells, and then you get the disease. And the first microglial Alzheimer's gene was CD33, which we found back in 08. And in fact, even in 08, when we found that, it was the first full genome-wide association screen of Alzheimer's families we had conducted, because we had gotten funding to do that from a very forward-thinking foundation, Cure Alzheimer's Fund, who also funded, Cure Alzheimer's Fund in Boston also funded the 3D Alzheimer's in a Dish model. So, you know, everything started coming together about the course of this disease. And that's why I like to say there's not a lot of mystery left, because we know the disease begins one to three decades before symptoms. Amyloid deposits, which could be a result of genetics where you make more amyloid or you don't clear it as well. And that amyloid, over time, causes tangles. And those tangles spread. Once you have a tangles, like the prions, they spread and propagate. And if that's all that happens, you won't get the disease. We know that because we have, once in a while, a resilient brain, a post-mortem brain of someone in their 80s who died with no cognitive issues. But to the amazement of the pathologist, is full of plaques and tangles. And you say, whoa, this is Alzheimer's. Nope, they were fine. And then the answer is always the same about why they didn't have Alzheimer's disease symptoms. No neuroinflammation. It is possible to have genes that protect you against neuroinflammation. So in terms of the mystery, the mystery now is how do we get the right drugs and treatments into people at the right time to end this disease, to nip it in the bud? And I have to tell you, this is the most exciting time in Alzheimer's ever because now we finally have a clear path. For those who are reading the literature and not reading the newspapers and getting stuck on clickbait, it's very clear that amyloid causes this disease, that tangles propagate the death, that neuroinflammation must then cause the massive cell death that leads to dementia. If you want to stop this disease, then stop amyloid. The faster you make amyloid in your brain, the sooner you get Alzheimer's disease. That's clear now. And so for younger people, let's stop the amyloid early, detect it early, and safely and affordably stop it early. For those who already suffer with the disease, let's try to put out that fire and help them as much as we can. Let's try to quell the neuroinflammation and stop the rampaging of death and synapse loss in their brains. That's the path forward. So I think a lot of the mystery is actually gone at this point. And you know, when I just turned 66 two days ago, and people say, a lot of my friends have retired, they say, are you going to retire? I'm like, are you kidding? Like every experiment I've done in my life since 1982 in Alzheimer's has led to this moment. This is the most exciting time. I'm more excited now than when I was a grad student isolating the amyloid gene, right? Because now there's finally the chance to finish the story in the next few years. And that's what I'm going to do. That's what my colleagues, that's what we're going to do in my lab. Well, everybody is pulling for you in that regard. But a dreadful disease really does need to be ended. In 2019, you had another interesting and important paper that investigated the crosstalk between microglial receptors CD33 and TREM2. These two genes have been associated, as you mentioned one of them earlier, with the risk of Alzheimer's disease. And I've heard you refer to these genes, or I think I read it in the paper, as yin and yang. Can you talk about why that is? What do you mean by these two genes are yin and yang? And tell us about the significance of this study. Yeah, I mentioned that back in 2008, when we carried out the first full genome-wide association screen in Alzheimer's families, the main gene that came out was this gene CD33. And Time Magazine called that discovery one of the top 10 medical breakthroughs of the year. And we were laughing because, like, we have no idea what this gene does. It's a new Alzheimer's gene. We didn't know what it did. And then a very talented scientist in my group, Anna Grichuk, had a paper in 2013 in Neuron First, where she showed that CD33 is the switch on the microglial cells that tells them, instead of being nice housekeepers, clearing the amyloid, taking up the amyloid and eating it and clearing it. And by the way, that's what the new Alzheimer's drugs that were just approved do. The KEMB and the Kisunla, they're immunotherapies that trigger the microglial cells to eat the amyloid. Well, CD33, as it turns out, we found out in 2013, tells the microglial cells, you don't have to eat amyloid and clean anymore. Just spit out pro-inflammatory cytokines and cause neuroinflammation. So it switches the microglial cells from helpful housekeepers to killers. And later, five years later, the TREM2 gene was found as the second microglial Alzheimer's gene at Decode Genetics. And TREM2 was the opposite, right? And Anna published in 2019, this paper you just referred to. That they yin and yang. TREM2 tells the microglial cells, keep eating the amyloid, keep calm and carry on, don't cause neuroinflammation. CD33 does the opposite. And we looked at the crosstalk between these two. And the reason why these, and there are many other receptors and intracellular proteins that are part of this pathway, where you constantly have these microglial cells in a spectrum between housekeeper and killer, clearing amyloid or inducing neuroinflammation. Why? Because microglial cells are the main defenders of the brain. They're the first defense. While they're cleaning up the amyloid and they're eating the amyloid, because the TREM2 is telling them to do that, the CD33 is creescent. So as they're eating, if they eat dead neurons, let's say a few neurons died with tangles because of the amyloid inducing the tangles, and they eat some dead neurons, that's a signal to them that there may be an infection. There doesn't have to be an infection. They were programmed by evolution to assume there's an infection if they're eating dead neurons. These signals are called DAMPs, right? So there's two ways to get a microglial cell to become a killer. They eat an actual microbe, like a bacteria or virus that's infectious, that's a PAMP, or they eat a dead neuron where they assume that that neuron died with infection. Either way, instead of housekeeping, they bring in their ramifications that are cleaning up debris and amyloid. They become amyloid, and they shoot out pro-inflammatory cytokines like a death star, and they tell them astrocytes to get involved, and they cause widespread neuroinflammation. Why? To wipe out that part of the brain so the infection, the perceived infection, doesn't spread. And so today, these microglial cells didn't get the memo that we live till 80 or 90 years old, that we do get plaques and tangles as we get older, and they cause some cell death. But when they sense that cell death, they assume it's an infection, just like they did 100,000 years ago, and say wipe out this part of the brain. And it's that process that causes 10 times more cell death and synapse loss than the original plaques and tangles. And now you finally start to fall into the symptoms of cognitive impairment and dementia. That's very interesting, and you describe it very well. Last year, you had a paper in Neuron that the press, in your words, sort of made a hash of or a mess of. Physical exercise has been shown to reduce amyloid beta in various Alzheimer's disease models, but is imperfectly associated with amyloid burden in humans. And the underlying mechanisms that account for this really have not been elucidated as far as I know. Irisin is an exercise-induced hormone, quite an interesting one, actually. In this paper, you revealed for the first time a cellular and molecular mechanism by which exercise-induced irisin attenuates amyloid beta pathology. I'm sure everyone wants to hear about this paper. A lot of our listeners are avid exercisers. And so if you could tell us about the paper and its findings, and how was it reported in a way that caused a lot of confusion and sort of made a mess of the description of your findings? And how much of this is relevant to humans, in your view? Well, the backdrop for that paper in Neuron, which was the first author of that paper, well, the major author of that paper was Sehun Choi, who was also the first author of the Nature paper on the first Alzheimer's 3D model as well. He was also the first author of a science paper we had in 2018 on how exercise induces neurogenesis, the birth of new neurons in the brain, and how that ameliorates cognition in Alzheimer's mice. So the backdrop for this study was that Bruce Spiegelman, my colleague at Dana-Farber, first discovered this protein, this little peptide called irisin, named after the Greek god or goddess iris, and it's secreted by muscles when you exercise. And then there was another paper in Cell by my close colleague Sam Sisodia in 2005 that said if you give mice running wheels, Alzheimer's disease, transgenic mice, you give them running wheels and they exercise, the amyloid is dramatically removed. And so the new paper in Neuron basically put it all together. What we showed is that irisin, when it's produced by muscles as you exercise, enters into the blood, is actively transported into the brain. We showed it binds a receptor on astrocytes. And when that happens, the astrocytes are less likely to become reactive. In other words, even if the microglial cells are upset and telling the astrocytes to become reactive and neuroinflammatory, they stay chilled out. And the astrocytes instead spit out an enzyme called neprilysin that enzymatically degrades the amyloid. So there's all these different ways the brain has evolved to make sure you don't have too much amyloid in the brain. You want some amyloid beta protein, it plays a role in the brain, but you don't want too much of the amyloid in the brain because that's going to trigger the tangles and the Alzheimer's cascade. So the brain can export the amyloid beta protein out actively to cross the blood-brain barrier. It can get the microglial cells to eat it, which happens with the right diet and with sleep, but it could also get the astrocytes, especially during sleep or exercise, to enzymatically break down the amyloid. Where I said the press got it, the press then took this and said, okay, then Alzheimer's patients, just exercise and you'll get better. Well, again, you know, exercise is great. It's a great idea for Alzheimer's patients. And inducing the new neuron sub-birth, the neurogenesis, will be helpful. But at that point, clearing the amyloid is still a little too late. That's something you want to do much earlier in the disease. So we had to try to set that straight. I can see how that would cause the confusion. I mean, I can imagine the interpretation. Anyone who works in science, irrespective of the part of science, but particularly in your part, you know, you deal with this throughout your career with sometimes well-intentioned media misrepresenting the situation in a way that leads to confusion and people taking actions that are probably not helpful. You're writing a new book, and I think you're doing this one on your own. You've done some marvelous books earlier with Deepak Chopra, and that's an interesting topic itself. How did you ever meet him, by the way? Oh, so back in 2010, I was invited to give the—it was the first time I gave a public lecture of this type. And I was invited to give a talk at TED Med, which was the TED for medical stuff. And the session was on aging. And I was—I talked about the biology of aging in my talk. Deepak Chopra talked about aging and spirituality. Quincy Jones, the musician, talked about being an aging musician and staying active. And Frank Gehry, the famous architect, talked about aging and staying active as an architect. So it was a really cool session. And literally—this is embarrassing—but later on, I was in the Hotel Del Coronado, and I was in the bathroom. And Deepak Chopra was, you know, in the other stall there, and a gurinal, to be honest. And he looks over to me, and he says, I really enjoyed your talk. So tell me, is the brain a noun or a verb? And I said, well, it's a verb, but I would really rather talk outside. So when we started talking, we had this—I always had this idea to write a book on neuroplasticity and the amazing ability of the brain to regenerate even after a stroke. And so, yeah, so we wrote this book. The first book we wrote together was Superbrain, and the book did extremely well. It sold, I don't know, I think it's a million copies now, and then that led us to do two more books together. They were also bestsellers. But, you know, the last book we published, it was a trilogy, the last book we published in 2018 was The Healing Self, about the amazing powers of the immune system to both protect you, but also how inflammation could hurt you. And in the last part of that book, we talked about a lifestyle plan to limit the amount of inflammation in your body and brain. And I had—so this is kind of crazy, because the same time that book came out, I had an album, a record album, come out with Joe Perry, various other artists, Ringo Starr's son, Zach Starkey, and we recorded it at Johnny Depp's house at his studio. And the book and the album came out the same day, and I had to do things for both of them. And I had to give a book talk on The Healing Self. And I said, how can I—I was literally in the shower, and I said, how could I summarize this action plan for reducing inflammation in the brain? And as I thought about it, I came up with the acronym SHIELD, which is sleep, H, handling stress, I, interaction with others, E, exercise, L, learn new things, D, diet. And I put it on Twitter, and it went viral. And now there's been, I don't know, tens of millions of views and various videos, not just for me, but for others. And SHIELD kind of became a thing of its own. So finally, I, when I decided to write my own new book on SHIELD, it'll be called Brain SHIELD, that will go into this stuff. But it emanated from, you know, just the basic pillars of health around getting enough sleep. It's during sleep that you clear amyloid from the brain. Handling stress, you know, chronic stress causes inflammation. Staying interactive with others, that stimulation that you need for the brain. Loneliness increases risk for Alzheimer's. Exercise, we talked about the benefits of exercise. Learning new things, we talked about having to make new synapses. And diet, we haven't spoken about. But diet, I think the main thing to remember is what's good for the gut is good for the brain. Sam Sissodia and I and others, Dave Holstman, we've published numerous papers now showing that if you positively affect the gut microbiome of Alzheimer's mice, that again, you get those microglial cells to clear more amyloid. And that's the name of the game for reducing risk. So you can use your, if you keep your gut microbiome happy with a plant-based diet and a lot of fiber, somehow that triggers in the brain the microglial cells to clear more amyloid and be less inflammatory. And I'll just finally say that Dean Ornish, who's very famous for his cardio diet, he and I published a paper about a month ago on a lifestyle intervention trial for Alzheimer's that was based on S.H.I.E.L.D. And it was a small trial, only 50 patients, 20 weeks. But we got incredibly positive results for a small trial that says we need to keep going. And this was a plant-based diet, vegan diet. But we sent them a device I invented that helps them to meditate, that uses light flashing and music that I produced. We had them be interactive. We had them do exercise. We monitored their sleep. And we got kind of results that were too good to be true in terms of cognition and amyloid biomarkers. And so we're going to do a bigger study now based on that. So I think S.H.I.E.L.D. has legs. And we're going to do more in terms of clinical trials. But also, I want to write this book and get the information out there. In terms of your own thinking, how do you bring together, you know, we've talked about a lot of different aspects of Alzheimer's disease. How do you bring it together in a sort of a comprehensive model in your thought process? We've talked about at some length the benefit of anti-amyloid therapies applied early on. You thought that that could be quite beneficial. And we're all hopeful that that's the case. And you also acknowledge that the accumulation of amyloid is not necessarily pathological or at least not directly leading to symptoms in all cases. And it sort of, the amyloid burden, as you mentioned earlier, doesn't completely predict cognitive function and cognitive decline. And many of the components of S.H.I.E.L.D., such as learning and cognitive stimulation, have been suggested to have little or no effect on the amyloid. So you've painted a really good picture here. And I'm wondering if there's a way to pull it all together in your view, or is this a work for the future? Or am I missing the thread that pulls it all together? Well, the only missing thread is if you have amyloid in your brain, it will trigger the tangles and the neuronal cell death. And you could be an extremely rare person where that does not trigger neuroinflammation. The microglial cells stay chilled out and you don't get the symptoms of Alzheimer's. But the vast majority of people, if you have amyloid, it's going to trigger tangles. And eventually, that process is going to trigger neuroinflammation. And eventually, there'll be enough cell death and synapses to get the disease. So once you have amyloid and tangles, it's a matter of whether you live long enough to get the disease. It's not a matter of whether, it's when. So if you were lucky enough to not get amyloid and tangles in your brain until you're quite old and you're going to die of other causes, then if you did live, if lifespan was average of 120 or 130, unfortunately, I think most people would have enough amyloid and tangles and inflammation with very few exceptions to get this disease. It's part of aging. In the early onset Alzheimer's genes, the first ones you discovered, get you this disease in your 40s and 50s, in some cases in your 20s. Down syndrome subjects get it middle age. If you carry two ApoE4 variants, you have higher risk for this disease in your 60s. So it's a continuum. So I think that what this says is that the path ahead is twofold. We need to carry out early prediction of who's at risk based on genetics and family history. Based on that, we need to know when to carry out early detection. Let's see if you're starting to make amyloid plaques in your brain. For some people, you need to start looking when they're 20 or 30 or 40s. Others, you don't need to look till they're 50 or 60, depending on your genetics and your family history. Then once you know that you have to do something about that amyloid, it's starting to accumulate. Or even before it accumulates, your genetics says, you're guaranteed to get Alzheimer's amyloid. Let's hit it now. We're going to need early intervention. We'll need drugs that are safe and affordable. So in a democratized manner, we can provide protection to everyone. Now, the SHIELD, in the meantime, SHIELD is aimed at both clearing amyloid and stopping inflammation, the SHIELD lifestyle plan. And the lifestyle intervention trial we did shows that it has legs. But in terms of drugs, the only two approved drugs out there for clearing amyloid are immunotherapies that are very expensive and they're not particularly safe, but they at least provide a proof of concept that removing amyloid, if you do it early enough, is good for Alzheimer patients. Now, if you ask how many people in America today, should they have the now available blood test that tells them they have amyloid in their brain? Yes, there is a blood test that mirrors PET scans and brain imaging to tell you if you have amyloid in your brain, how many people with that blood test would find out they have amyloid in their brain and are at high risk for Alzheimer's disease one or two, maybe three decades from now. That number is 50 million people, five zero. 50 million people in this country don't have Alzheimer's disease, clinical symptoms, but already have the pathology in the brain brewing. We need to provide them with interventions that are safe and affordable to nip that in the bud, to bring that amyloid back down, to stop the tangles from spreading, to quell the neural inflammation. So this is what my lab focuses on now. I have a novel drug I've been developing for 20 years that lowers the amyloid production. We'll be going into phase one trials next year. It took 20 years and about $25 million of NIH funding and funding from foundations like the Cure Alzheimer's Fund to get there. But the other thing we've done, and this came from work I did with a company I co-founded as co-founding SAB head, Amilix. Amilix came up with a repurposed drug, two drugs repurposed together for ALS that was approved a few years ago, Covalivrio. Now the phase three fails, so the drug was withdrawn, but it did help a lot of people and the company's still giving it to about a thousand ALS patients who benefited from it and they're getting it for free. But anyway, that company provided the proof of concept. You could screen known drugs that are already safe and create combinations of them that are multimodal and synergistic to hit different pathologies at once and create new drugs from existing repurposed drugs. And I've been doing this now for seven years, using the Alzheimer's in a dish model over the last seven years and about $5 million of funding from Cure Alzheimer's Fund. We've screened every known drug. We've screened over 2,000, 3,000 natural products, and we have a list of which ones stopped the plaques, which ones prevent the tangles downstream of the plaques, and which ones quell the neuroinflammation, and which ones get those mycoglial cells to eat more amyloid. And we're using combinations of those now in clinical trials, quick go-no-go trials in Alzheimer's patients to say, is this combination doing in a patient what it did in the dish by tracking their pathology when they're on the drugs based on blood-based biomarkers? We have blood tests that can tell you, are we reducing the amyloid? Are we reducing tangles and inflammation? And you can use those biomarkers to simply ask in a short six-month trial, are these drugs getting into the brain and doing in patients what we saw in the dish based on blood-based biomarkers? So that's the bulk of my work right now, is to find these repurposed drugs and natural products, because the pathway to patients is two-thirds shorter if you have known drugs that are already safe versus trying to do a new drug that has to be proven safe. So I have one new drug that is basically the last man standing in the world for a drug that can turn off the tap. Remember, all these other drugs we hear about are clearing the amyloid after it's there. It's like a sink full of water, the brain full of amyloids. The existing drugs are Roto-Rooter, right? They clear the amyloid. But the amyloid's already there and they're already causing problems. I'm developing a drug that turns off the tap early on. And that drug we hope someday will be the statin, the same way you take a statin to hit cholesterol to prevent heart disease. This would be the statin equivalent to hit amyloid to prevent Alzheimer's. So that's why I'm more excited than ever about our work. Yeah, I can see that. Have you discovered any particularly promising existing FDA-approved drugs or nutraceuticals that seem to be beneficial given the large screen you told us about? Yes, over 300 of them. Between natural products and approved drugs, we have over 100 in each category. Ones that drive the microglial cells to clear the amyloid, ones that prevent the amyloid from inducing detangles and spread, and ones that simply chill out the microglial cells from becoming neuroinflammatory. And we're choosing from those combinations. So when I talked to the NIH who funded the novel drug we came up with that was called a gamma secretase modulator, where we learned how to make that drug based on the presenilin genes that we discovered in 1995. It took that long to get there. They said, you know, it's a new drug. We would rather you don't, as an academic, sponsor the IND. In other words, apply for the clinical trial. So they said, either license it to a company or start a company. So I started a new company, a new recommendation back in November of 2022, called Active Pharmaceuticals. I'm the scientific founder. For disclosure, I have equity in the company. And just like I mentioned Amilix, I should say I have equity in that company too. And that company is developing the new drug. But right now, we took the six or seven best repurposed, you know, known drugs. And you would have never predicted these. Believe me, you would have never said, oh, I bet you it's this drug or that. This is agnostic. We screen and see what works. You wouldn't have picked any of these drugs based on hypotheses or just predictions. I had to come just out of screening. So we took those six or seven best drugs and made combinations of those. And they're being tested in Alzheimer's mice right now as we speak. And the ones that look best for hitting what we think they should hit in mice, those would then be put into clinical trials and patients for the next step to say, are we hitting the pathologies we expect to with known repurposed drugs? And if they work, the pathway to getting them into patients, because they're already known and safe, will be literally two-thirds shorter than normal. That makes perfect sense. I'm sure you have people hounding you for what are the most promising so far, because Alzheimer's is just such a widespread problem. Well, for the drugs, we stay quiet because we don't want people taking a prescribed drug off label until we know more. But you also looked at natural. Yes, yes, Rudy. Yeah, for the natural products, it's different. For natural products, I do share it with family and friends. I share it with the local football team, the Patriots. I share it with people in need, saying, look, I take these personally. I'm getting older. They're considered to be safe by the FDA. We see combinations of these help clear the amyloid or stop the tangles and inflammation. I share it with family and friends. I have a, when I do that, I have a huge disclaimer that says, this is not clinical. We have no clinical evidence. They work yet. We're planning the clinical trials in the future. This is lab-based evidence. I take them personally. They're deemed to be safe, but who knows? So I have to put that disclaimer there. This is not advice from Mass General or Harvard. And I share it with family and friends. I share it with my rock star musician friends who need help. And it's amazing. Anecdotally, and again, never substitute anecdotes for clinical trials, but anecdotally, I've gotten so much amazing feedback, whether it be an ex-football player, an ex-rock star who did too many drugs in the 70s, or an older person who's having memory issues. Because anecdotally, I'm very inspired to do the trials and get this out there because we're seeing, you know, N of ones saying that they're feeling better. And, you know, I'm one of those N of ones. And I know, you know, I know how much better I feel. I'm having my knee surgery next week. So I was told to stop all my supplements, you know, in advance because you never know what they do. So I haven't been on these supplements now for, since the beginning of the month. And I'm fine, but I feel the difference. I feel the difference in sharpness and focus by not being on them. Well, now that you've thoroughly teased our audience, you should probably tell us about the natural products that you find most beneficial. Well, I, you know, I like to do that in an email with a disclaimer. Like, in other words, I think each person who gets this has to have the disclaimer. So I, you know, after discussing this with MasterCard, they said, look, don't publicly announce these things. You can provide it in a written email where they just go, you know, email me, rtansy at mgh.harvard.edu. I'll send you the list with a disclaimer, but I do it carefully now because you don't want to just say, hey, take this. People do it willy nilly and they might say, oh, tansy has clinical evidence. I don't have clinical evidence. Well, they might revert. I'd like to do it in writing, you know, with that disclaimer. But, you know, this is something that I guess, you know, I've been working with the Patriots for nine seasons. And this is my 10th season where I just had a meeting with them last week where I update the list every, every year to say, these are the natural products that might help with these poor guys who are getting bangs on the head every day, who are at increased risk for tangles and inflammation. No guarantees. You don't have the clinical evidence, but it's better than nothing here to do to suit because you can take in the morning to try to offset what's happening in your brain with all those bangs to the head every day. No, I'm glad you're doing that. It's a big problem in football and other sports as well. So I have one last question. You are the only scientist I know who plays with rock bands and is a prolific scientist. I want to make sure our listeners understand that you're not just goofing off. You're a prolific scientist. Hundreds and hundreds. Yeah, science is number one. Hundreds of publications. I think six, 700 maybe articles. Over 700 and over 165,000 citations. Right. And for the non-scientists, that's very prolific production. And you've just mentioned the Patriots. You have two Super Bowl rings for your work with them. So you're pretty unique. And the theory on STEM talk, you know, the whole idea of the show is for the double secret selection committee, which I chair, and all votes are unanimous. The idea is to select some of the most interesting people working in science and technology. And the selection committee obviously did its work. So would you tell us how do you manage to accomplish all that you do? You have the same 24-hour day that the rest of us have. You know, I guess I do it in spurts, right? So, you know, there was that time between 2010 and 2018 where I wrote the three New York Times bestsellers. And that took a lot of my time. And it was also during that time I was recording records with Alice Smith and Joe Perry and others. And that took time. And then my science was going on because luckily I have really good people working with me. I run a unit of 10 labs with 70 people, including my own lab. And then around 20, when I finished writing the third book with Deepak Chopra, I said, man, I got to get back to enough of this, enough rock and roll, enough books. You know, I still have my research going. I was publishing papers. But I said, okay, now it's nose to the grindstone. I'm not writing any books. I'm going to stop doing the studio stuff and music. I will continue to help the Patriots. I was on the sidelines for games. And I said, nose to the grindstone. And I got back to the lab and only did that. And all of my activity was in Excel sheets and data. And it paid off. I mean, this year alone, I think I just co-authored my 35th publication just this year alone. That didn't happen in 2016 while I was writing books. So you have to know when to do something new. And you have to also know when to say, hey, I have to get back to business. And you don't do it all at once. You dole it out in periods of time as your intuition and your own body and brain and mind and spirit tell you. And so right now, yeah, I'm, you know, I still work in my studio. I'm writing some music for some people. Work with engineers who record me in my own studio. You know, I'm no longer doing the sidelines for the Patriots. But I meet with them by Zoom to help them with brain health. I am going to write the Shield book because it's due. And I think I can help people. But it's all about just, you can't do it all at once. You have to do it in periods of time and spurts. And you have to always know when your top priority must come back to the fore. And that is science. Science and research first. I can genuinely say, despite having done all of these different things in my life, nothing makes me happier than a very large Excel sheet that almost crashes my computer with a font of 8 where I can sort data. That is my greatest joy outside of my family. Well, you've managed to do quite a lot. And your working in spurts model, I think, is a good guide for many others as well. And this has been great fun, Rudy. Thanks for coming on the show. We've been looking forward to it. And we appreciate it. Thank you. It's been a really fun conversation. It has been. Thanks again. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Rudy is quite an interesting fellow. He has two Super Bowl rings, plays keyboards with bands like the Aerosmith, writes books with Deepak Chopra, and somehow finds time to run an absolutely thriving lab and make very important discoveries that are really driving a deeper understanding of Alzheimer's disease. As our listeners know, Stem Talk is about long-form conversations with some of the most interesting people in the world of science and technology. Rudy is a fascinating character and an excellent scientist. So, the Double Circuit Selection Committee found him to be a perfect fit for Stem Talk. Perhaps more importantly, he has really done a great job of spreading the word about what we can do to maintain brain health as we age. There is a helpful podcast interview with Rudy on the Harvard Magazine website that you could check out if you want information about steps to take to maintain brain health. We will be sure to link to it in our show notes. This is Ken Ford signing off for now. Until we meet again on Stem Talk. Thank you for listening to Stem Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So, please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, stemtalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview. Thank you.