 Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host, Don Conegas, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is a man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hi Don, great to be here. So today we have Dr. Michael Leone, who's a professor emeritus at the Department of Neurobiology and Behavior at the University of California Irvine. So his research has focused on the benefits of sensory motor stimulation for children with autism spectrum disorder, for the treatment of anorexia, and for those that dementia and neurological conditions. And his lab at UC Irvine is focused on studying the benefits of increased sensory motor activity in children with autism spectrum disorder, really interesting research. Before we get to our interview with Dr. Leone, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the widest and most lavishly-preased filled reviews to read on Stem Talk. If you hear your review read on Stem Talk, just contact us at StemTalk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker, Life Long Learner 1. The review is titled, It's Getting Better All the Time. This must have been written by a beetle. The review reads, Stem Talk are in depth interviews with really interesting scientists and engineers working right at the front edge. These episodes are in depth discussions with fascinating scientists and engineers. The health-related episodes are particularly interesting as the hosts and guests go pretty far down some deep rabbit holes. Well thank you, Life Long Learner 1, and thanks all of our other Stem Talk listeners who helped Stem Talk become such a great success. OK, and now onto today's interview with Dr. Michael Lillon. Stem Talk, Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm your host, Don Conegas, and joining us today is Dr. Michael Lillon. Michael, welcome to the podcast. Great to be here. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Don, and hello, Michael. Glad you're here. So Michael, let's just get started with a simple question. How did you get interested in science? Well, I was in college. I went to Brooklyn College. I grew up in Brooklyn, New York. And after my sophomore year, I decided to take a very interesting and glamorous job as a lifeguard, which turned out to be something very different from what I thought it was going to be. So instead of being a glamorous, interesting job, it turned out to be a really boring job, because you're looking at the water all the time. And it dispersed with periods of complete horror, because when you try to save somebody, their first response is to try to drown you. They're going to hold on to your head. And hopefully that'll do something good. But of course, it's just very stressful to do that. So I decided that I didn't want to do that anymore. I started to take summer classes at the college, and I got a job there. And this one was pretty glamorous. It was cleaning rat cages in the dark. Oh, boy. And so that was my introduction into research. Turned out though that it was very interesting. And over time, I actually listened and discussed what was going on there. And eventually did a project there that was published in science as my senior project. And so I just thought it was really interesting. And I just started to do it, and I seem to have a knack for it. So I continued on to graduate school at the University of Chicago. And eventually you studied all factions. So how did you get interested in that specific field? Well, I started out as an endocrinologist. And I was taking photographs for a chapter that I'd written. And I had to separate the mothers from the baby rats to show them in different ways. And so when I put the rats back into the large cage, they made a beeline for the mother, even though their eyes were closed, and it occurred to me that maybe she was putting out an attractance odor, and it turned out to be the case and spent a decade looking at that from different angles. And it was a very fascinating story. And you also did research in the area of autism, which was reflected in a series of studies that started in 2013 and continued through 2016. Can you tell us a little bit about that work as well? Yeah, so there are hundreds and hundreds of studies showing that lab animals are normally kept in their plain isolated box cages. And they seem to be fine. You know, they learn. They remember they have motor activities and social activities. But when you put them in a so-called enriched environment, which is a much bigger cage, some friends to play with, many toys to play with, places to exercise, and a lot of variability and novelty in this situation, their brains become much more complex, much more capable, and even more interesting is that when scientists have made animal models of human neurological disorders, these animals express their human-like neurological symptoms when they're in a box cage. But when they're putting an enriched environment, they lose many or all of them. And it turns out there were seven models of autism that people made in different ways, and all of them respond well to environmental enrichment. Not only that, but there was a situation in Romania where they had a leader named Chachezcu who decided to do all kinds of interesting things, he's bettered the economy. And then he decided that he wanted to have more people in the country, and so he forbid all contraception. So people were poor, and they had a lot of children, and so they were brought to these state orphanages. And the orphanages put them each, one of these children, in their own isolated box cage. And rather than having maybe one or two percent have autism symptoms when they got out, about 33 percent of them had autism symptoms. So when you decrease sensory stimulation, you get an increase in autism symptoms, and then they gave some of these children to high quality foster care. And that's when they pay the parents full time to be full time parents of these children. And many of them improved greatly, and they lost their autism symptoms. So when you increase sensory stimulation, you decrease the autism symptoms in these children. So we thought that maybe it would work for children with autism. And while people think that children are getting a great deal of stimulation in our affluent modern world, maybe they're not getting the best kind and most complex kinds of stimulation, particularly olfactory stimulation. And so we gave the parents a kit. They went home in 15 minutes in the morning, 15 minutes in the evening. They got different sensory motor exercises. And several times a day they were given olfactory stimulation. And after six months, the kids who were enriched had a great improvement in their symptoms. 42 percent of them had a major improvement in their symptoms compared to 7 percent on standard care and standard care in this area is pretty elaborate. But it's not very effective. And after six months, 21 percent of these kids with serious classic autism symptoms were no longer classified in that way compared to 0 percent in standard care. There were improvements in IQ and communication and sensory responses. And it turns out that all of the ancillary symptoms that are not picked up by any other treatment, such as problems with eating, emotion, motor skills, all of those things improved as well. And so it's available now online, anybody anywhere in the world can access it. It's called mendability. And people have been using it now for a number of years. Fascinating. And so just speaking about the environmental enrichment research that you've been doing, you've also been interested in environmental enrichment aging. And that's been reflected in research you've done since 2018. So you can you talk a little bit about that? Sure. It turns out that the aging brain needs as much sensory stimulation as it can get. It needs visual stimulation, needs auditory stimulation. It needs chewing, which most people don't realize. And it needs olfactory stimulation. And the olfactory stimulation turns out in our view to be the most important. And that's because the olfactory system is the only sensory system that has a direct super highway access into the memory centers of the brain and also the emotional centers of the brain. And consequently, it has much greater impact on those abilities than the other senses. And any loss of olfaction at any time in life will cause a deterioration of the memory systems in your brain. And as people age, the memory systems become poorer and anyone over 60 knows that they're starting to forget things. But hand in hand with the ability to forget things is the ability to smell things. Both memory and olfaction deteriorate at the same rate starting at about the age of 60 and continuing down through the rest of your life. This brings us to your 2023 study titled overnight olfactory enrichment using an odorant diffuser improves memory and modifies the use in a faciless in older adults. So let's dive right into that. Tell us about this recent work on the role of olfactory enrichment and memory in older adults. Well, we want to give people olfactory enrichment and that is giving them multiple odors on a regular basis. And this has been shown to stimulate the brain, particularly the memory centers and the emotional centers. So what we did was we gave a diffuser with seven different odors to older adults and we had them take it home, put it on their nightstands and every night we had them give themselves a different odor for two hours when they went to sleep. Now, the reason that we did it when they went to sleep is that we wanted to assure universal compliance. Compliance is really a real problem for virtually anything that you do in medicine. People are very reluctant to actually do anything. Even people who have had a heart attack, you know, a large proportion of them don't take a load those aspirin every day to prevent another heart attack. And so it's not the cost. It's just the bother. People just don't bother to do things. And so we want to make sure that people are in the same place at the same time and getting it every night. And that's why we do it when they're sleeping. We did a preliminary study while older adults were awake and we also found that they would improve, but we were not sure that people would actually do it when they were awake on a regular basis. So we did a study with older adults six months gave them stimulation every night. And after six months, they had a spectacular improvement in their memory relative to the controls. They had a 226% improvement and to my knowledge, that's the largest improvement in memory, seen in older adults that anyone has reported. Yes, the study really was interesting. You had seven different odors they rotated through, as you mentioned, one each night for two hours. Was there something specific about your selection of odors or was it just that they were differentiated from each other? So we wanted to get a group of odors that sort of covered the whole olfactory spectrum. And that's hard with seven odors, but we selected different kinds of odors from different families of odors because we wanted to get maximum stimulation of that system. We also wanted to get pleasant, safe odors that people wouldn't mind if they had them in their bedroom. And so we tried a whole number of them and these were the ones that we thought best fit the deal. We selected them for any sort of a Rome therapy kind of idea that is people think that different odors have very special responses in the brain and we didn't select them based on that. We just selected them based on their variability and their pleasantness. We received quite a few questions and lots of comments about the paper. Several of the questions had to do with a large percentage of older folks use CPAP or BIPAP machines and that would tend to filter the odor probably pretty effectively. I don't know. And somebody mentioned perhaps even incorporating it in some way. I thought I'd ask you that just because several listeners had raised that question. Yeah. So we know about this issue and we're not going to be dealing with it on our first go around. We're going to have a special CPAP addition. So we know that people are not going to be doing the thing at night if it takes any kind of effort. And so we've developed a device that allows people to put in a belt, press a button and go to sleep and 40 odors will come on twice a night while they're sleeping and that's shown to give maximum benefit for memory. And also depression improves the pressure and symptoms as well. So that's called memory air. It'll be available in a month or two. People are interested. They can go to memory air.com and sign up and we'll let them know when it's available. Great. Yeah, super exciting. So as Ken mentioned, that your article that appeared in frontiers in neuroscience last year drew a lot of interest from our listeners. And one question that came up is how did you select older adults for the study and how did you entice them to participate? And from what I understand you said that recruiting people to the study wasn't really that hard. Yeah. You know, recruiting is always the most unpredictable part of doing any clinical trial. And we had the good fortune to be associated with the Alzheimer's research center at UC Irvine. And they have a group called I-Mind that has been funded to have a sign up list of interested older adults in the area. And they have consented to be contacted by us. And they are very interested in participating in research. And so it's relatively easy for us. We just contact them. They already know why we're doing this. They've already expressed interest in it. And one of the things that I thought was interesting is that we thought it would be difficult to get people to do the MRIs that we took when they were in the study. But in fact, people were motivated to be in the study simply because they wanted to see a picture of their brain. And so that turned out to be a feature not a bug. As you mentioned earlier, and in fact your whole body of research that you've conducted shows that ofaction is much more important than most people realize. And you talked a little bit about this in the beginning and that changes in ofaction predict and align with changes in reductions in cognitive function, I guess, in particular memory. When you think about this recent last few years, a large number of people reported a loss of smell as a result of COVID. I wondered if your work connects to that. And what you think in that regard, that was another set of questions from listeners that either they had lost their sense of smell, even relatively young listeners, or it was diminished as a consequence of a COVID infection. Yeah, so there are many ways to damage your ofactory system. People can damage it with smoking or being in air pollution or having chronic stress, even chronic stress in childhood, various medications, menopause, a head injury, all of these things will cause the ofactory system to be damaged. And it turns out that this was seen with COVID. And when people have lost their ofactory ability, even briefly, many of them have recovered it, small number haven't, but researchers from Oxford University looked at over 500 of these individuals who had recovered months before from a mild case of COVID. And they continue to have cognitive problems. And they also continue to have damage in the ofactory superhighway into the memory centers of the brain. And so even though they had recovered, even though they probably don't notice that they're still not as sharp as they were, the memory tests show that they really still have difficulties and those difficulties are sent in the ofactory system. And indeed, when you look at Alzheimer's disease, the ofactory system is the first to go. It's the first symptom of Alzheimer's, and that's the part of the brain that goes out before any other. And sees kits and other kinds of ofactory remediation targeting folks suffering from the loss of smell, a consequence of COVID. Have those shown promise? Yeah, so there is a phenomenon called ofactory training that is similar to ofactory enrichment. The idea there is to improve the ofactory system. And it's been shown to be effective for many different kinds of ofactory loss, for example, in Parkinson's disease. And so I'd encourage people to use it. There are other things that people have used that greatly improve the outcomes when they're doing ofactory training to improve their ofactory system. You mentioned the loss of smell or a reduction in ofactory function as a potential consequence of menopause. Is that related to hormonal changes like estrogen? Almost certainly, but we really don't know very much about how it does that. Very interesting. We do know that ofactory loss accompanies virtually all neurological and psychiatric disorders. I've counted about 70 of them. All the ones that you know about, all the ones that you probably don't know about, all are associated with ofactory loss. And the things that are most likely to kill you, heart disease, cancer, kidney disease, lung disease, liver disease, all of those are associated with ofactory loss. And so it may be that the loss of ofaction really makes your brain and body at elevated risk for expressing these kinds of symptoms. And potentially sort of a canary in the coal mine. Yes, exactly. And you know, we sort of see that in Alzheimer's disease. There's a fascinating phenomenon called cognitive reserve. Cognitive reserve is when people come in and you look at their brains and they have all the symptoms and their brains, all the pathology in their brains of someone with Alzheimer's disease and profound memory loss. And the thing about these people is that they have all that pathology and they don't have memory loss. And when you look at them carefully, what you see is that they have a high level of education, a intellectually challenging career and increased social interactions. So they've had environmental enrichment over the course of their life. And this prevents the symptom that is memory loss from being expressed. And maybe what we're doing with the ofactory stimulation is that we're duplicating the effects of cognitive reserve without having you go back and complete college again. And what it does is it directs, it goes directly into the memory centers of the brain and stimulates them and gives what may be called an ofactory reserve that improves the memory, improves the brain and the memory. And that allows people to perhaps not have the symptoms even though they have the neuropathology in their brain. Very interesting. So we're curious, Michael, how do the physiological changes that you saw in response to ofactory training compared to changes seen by other interventions such as dancing or even listening to music or audiobooks? There are other studies where people have done different kinds of environmental enrichment and they see similar kinds of changes in the unsanitary vesiculus, which is the pathway in the brain that connects different parts of the memory system. And that's what we found. I think it's really interesting that the pattern of response in the brain was almost identical to the pattern of response of the memory behavior. And I think it reinforces the behavioral findings when you find something like that in the brain. Well, this study was really interesting. It was had a big response as we all know. But what about the limitations? Every study has some limitations, even the most interesting studies. What do you see as the primary limitations and what do you see as your follow-up or what do you have planned along these lines? Well, the main limitation is that we were hit by COVID and had to curtail the study. Instead of having a couple of hundred people in the study, we had a fraction of that. And so I think it's going to be really important to replicate the study with a large number of individuals and to look at people both who are normal cognitive ability in old age and also look at individuals who have mild cognitive impairment and those with Alzheimer's disease. And we want to use the memory-air device so that we can give 40 odors twice a night, which has been shown at this point to be the most effective treatment for Alzheimer's that's out there. And so we want to have the kind of treatment for Alzheimer's that is effective, safe, low cost and convenient. And the last couple of drugs that have been approved for it are ineffective, dangerous, high cost and difficult to obtain. And so we think we can bring something that is effective and doesn't bring all these other problems with it. So we're going to use the device to see if we can treat those individuals. The next group that we're interested in are children who've had high level of adverse childhood experiences and adverse childhood experiences are different kinds of bad things that happen to children that give them chronic stress while they're growing up. And it's typically maltreatment and neglect that do this. But what you see is that it impacts about 60 different psychiatric and somatic kinds of problems. And the same parts of the brain deteriorate as deteriorate in the aging brain and Alzheimer's. And so we want to see if we can improve their brains and make them more capable when they're still young enough so that we can impact our lives in a material way. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, locomotion, health span, resilience, and performance. One sees some degree of commonality, not completely, of course, but some some notable commonality between neurologic disorders such as Alzheimer's and various kinds of trauma to the brain. I'm wondering, have people taken a look at this general ofactory approach with respect to wellness in the context of mild traumatic brain injury, you know, MTBI's? Yeah. So we're very interested in that as well. Traumatic brain injury is one of those problems that's accompanied by olfactory loss. And we want to see whether we can improve both their olfactory ability and their cognitive and emotional stability. We also see this with PTSD. Again, the olfactory system both goes to the memory system and to the emotional center of the brain. And we think this is going to be an effective way to treat PTSD. Hmm. Those are both topics of interest here as well. So we often think of sleep as a time where we consolidate stimuli that the brain receives during the day, rather than being a time when new stimuli are presented in process. So can you discuss how the brain processes different stimuli when awake versus asleep and whether that influences their state design at all? Well, it's particularly interesting for the olfactory sense because the olfactory sense, as I said, has the only super high way into the memory centers. But what that means is that it avoids going to a part of the brain called the thalamus. And the thalamus really collects information and distributes it into the brain and is sort of the brain's side streets. Importantly, for sleep is that the thalamus has connections to the parts of the brain that control sleep. And all of the other senses, therefore, can affect sleep. For example, a loud sound will wake you up. Bright lights will wake you up. Touching will wake you up. Nobody's tried taste, but you get the idea. At the same time, you can't wake somebody up with olfactory stimulation. They've actually tried to do this because people who are deaf can't use normal alarm clocks to wake them up because they can't hear them. But even the smell of frying bacon won't wake people up. And so the good thing is about the olfactory stimulation is that won't wake you up. But we and others have shown that it actually improves sleep. The depth of sleep, the quality of sleep, and the duration of sleep. So in this study, the enriched individuals had 22 minutes more sleep than the controls and the controls decrease their sleep by about three minutes a night. Others have shown that it improves the depth of sleep and the different stages are affected differently. This I think is just an extra benefit of having olfactory stimulation at night. It perhaps can help you sleep better. So the adults in the 2023 study were healthy and did not show any signs of dementia. So we're curious what you can share about the use of olfactory enrichment with older adults who are living with a dementia diagnosis. So there's a wonderful study out of South Korea that showed that if you give a dimension of the most documented older adults, 40 odors, twice a day, they have a highly significant improvement in their memory on five standard memory tests. And they also have their depression symptoms greatly improved. The problem of course is no one is going to give themself 40 odors twice a day, particularly if they have memory problems. And that's when we decided to incorporate 40 odors into our memory air device to give people the optimum number of odors that will allow them to improve their memory even in dementia. Does this olfactory approach seem efficacious both in the context of Alzheimer's and other forms of dementia like vascular dementia? Yeah, so all forms of dementia are accompanied by olfactory loss. And the reality is that there are probably very few pure kinds of dementia. So for example, you probably don't find people who just have Alzheimer's disease. They probably have a combination of front or temporal disorder, semantic problems. I mean, the highest risk factor for Alzheimer's and dementia is old age and dozens of things are going wrong in the aging brain. And so it may be the case that everybody who has Alzheimer's disease or dementia of different kinds has it for a very specific combination of reasons, you know, many strokes, many seizures. All sorts of things are going wrong. You know, mitochondrial problems, inflammation, and it may be that everybody who gets Alzheimer's gets it for a somewhat different reason than everybody else. That's probably also the case with autism. That might actually explain to some extent the difficulty and challenge associated with pharmacological approaches to Alzheimer's if it's different causes, different mechanisms in different people. I can imagine this would be quite a challenge. Yeah, and I think that's one of the problems with developing effective drugs for autism Alzheimer's Parkinson's is that they're looking for a single thing that's going to be improved. And it probably is the case that for many or most of these problems, it's a combination of factors. And so the probability of having dozens of drugs developed, for example, to treat autism or Alzheimer's is probably unrealistic. And one of the wonderful things about using environmental enrichment is that it has dozens and dozens of effects on the brain. And that's probably why it's so effective in improving the human-like symptoms of all these animal models. And they're very different animal diseases that these animal models show. And the idea that you can treat them effectively with environmental enrichment has shown that you can affect dozens of processes in the brain that allow the individual to improve something that you just can't do with a single drug. Beyond all factory stimulation, what other types of environmental enrichment does the research seem to suggest that should be tried as folks get older? I mean, I've heard about dance and tennis and reading, keeping the mind alive. Is there anything specific that jumps out at you? Yeah, it's just anything that you can do to stimulate your brain and your body. I mean, everybody knows that exercise is good for your mind and your heart and your emotions and almost nobody does it particularly in older adults. I think it's 15% of older adult men and have even a minimal amount of exercise. And so people know that they need to do these things, but they tend not to do them. People delay getting their lenses replaced to improve their eyesight. Nobody likes the idea of going under the knife. People won't get hearing aids that they need, particularly men because you can see the hearing aids in people with short hair. And so they tend not to get the hearing aids that they need. And men are five times more likely to have hearing problems than women. And so you can tell people that they should do this or that, but it's difficult to get people to actually do them. Absolutely. And you know, you've noted and mentioned that environmental enrichment, including olfaction therapy, won't cure the dementia, but may perhaps slow or even stop the symptoms from being expressed. And this is really wonderful and it helps explain the reaction to the paper. People are naturally very concerned about dementia. And it had a big response. It was one of the most requested interviews among our listeners. We've had several that were heavily requested, but this was certainly one of them. Well, it's clear that it's touched a nerve. People are very concerned about it. Many people have had dementia in their families and they see the awful consequences of having that. And so they're highly motivated. And everybody gets older and everybody starts to lose their memory. And so the first time you can't remember somebody's name, I think it stimulates you to become interested in things that can help you avoid pretty awful consequence. You mentioned earlier that you may be developing a CPAP or BIPAP version. That would strike me as something very popular because there's overlap in the communities with sleep apnea and a whole range of other issues. So when one would think that that would be a popular thing. Yeah, so it's been an interesting experience developing a new device. I think there are 200 parts to it. And several countries and several companies developing different aspects of it. So we're just about done with all that. It's in production now. And down the road, it shouldn't be hard to develop a CPAP device that allows you to get the olfactory stimulation that you need. I think that would be welcome. And I think your device that's coming out soon will also be well received. We've had thousands of people sign up for it already. I've been impressed by the interest both in the subject matter and in the device. Yeah, it's an approach to a terrifying problem that doesn't ask a lot. It's not imagine compliance is easy. And what could happen? Your room could smell much better. There's not a lot of downside. Right. I think there are different things that people are drawn to and accept readily. And then there are findings that people just aren't interested in accepting. And this is one of the former. People really like the idea. They're happy about finding out about this. And they're highly motivated. And they're highly interested. And I think that's not true of all of these kinds of findings. So it's something about the fear of losing your mind. And people I think are just drawn to odors. They like them for the most part. And so the combination, I think, is just a good combination. People are drawn to it. Absolutely makes perfect sense. So Michael, you've mentioned that people often think of all faction as the least important sense or sense that they think that they could do without it if they had to. And really, this works just that in some regards, this couldn't be further from the truth, do you think? Yeah. It's one of these things that when people hear about it, they say things like, why doesn't everybody know about this? The reason that people just don't notice. Most people who lose their ability to smell things gradually don't realize it. It's just when you lose them rapidly, as was the case with COVID, that they recognize it. And they also don't know about the fact that the olfactory ability is gone in many kinds of neurological and psychiatric and somatic problems. And so they don't see the relationship between one thing and the other. And when it's pointed out to them, I think most people change their mind about the importance of olfaction. So Michael, we're curious, what's next for you and your team? Well, we're going to use the memory or device to see that we can replicate this in a large group of older adults. We then want to move on to older adults with dementia. And then children who have high levels of address childhood experiences. And I think that will bring us down the road to where we can have people from various ages and problems deal with this. We think it also may be able to improve the outcomes from our autism therapies. It's really exciting work. And we wish you the best of luck. Michael, we've really enjoyed speaking with you today. Thank you so much for joining us on Stem Talk. My pleasure. It was great, Michael. Thanks a lot. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. So Ken, I really enjoyed our talk with Dr. Leon. The work that he and his team are doing is just fascinating. And the applications of this olfaxial stimulation study are potentially important in really wide reaching. Yes, Don. I agree that this research is indeed interesting. But perhaps more importantly, olfactory stimulation is something that folks can try relatively easily at home with little downside and little cost. After the 2023 paper about the use of the essential oils and the memory improvements associated with their use was published. We received many listener requests for this topic. I hope this interview answered most of the questions. And we will stay in touch with Michael to see what comes next from him and his colleagues. And I'll be really exciting. If you enjoy this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the Stem Talk web page where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes at StemTalk.us. This is Don Kanegas signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stem Talk. Thank you for listening to StemTalk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, StemTalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview. StemTalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview.