 Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hello. Today I'm your host, Dr. Marcus Bauman, joining me to introduce today's podcast is the man behind the curtain Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all of the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hello Marcus, great to be here. Today we have Dr. Anirogg Singh, the chief medical officer at Timeline Nutrition, a Swiss life science company that focuses on ways to improve mitochondrial and cellular health. Anirogg is particularly known for his research into the gut metabolite, uralith and A, which has been shown to improve muscle strength, protect immune systems, and optimize mitochondrial function and efficiency. Anirogg is an MD in internal medicine and he has a PhD in immunology. He's the author of many scholarly papers and has 15 patents. He has led more than 50 randomized clinical trials, many of them focused on uralithane over the past decade. In today's episode we will be talking to Anirogg about his investigations into uralithane and the role it plays in mitochondrial function and health. We also discussed uralithane on episode 118 with Julie Anderson from the Buck Institute. Before we get to our interview with Anirogg, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the widest and most lavishly praise filled reviews to read on Stem Talk. If you hear your review read on Stem Talk, just contact us at StemTalk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today, our Weaning Review is short and sweet and was posted by someone who goes by the moniker, Jazzy Judah. The review is titled So Great. The review reads, Keep it Up, What a Wonderful Dissemination of Important Science. Well thank you Jazzy Judah and thanks to all our other Stem Talk listeners who have helped Stem Talk become such a great success. Okay and now on to today's interview with Dr. Anirogg Singh. Stem Talk, Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Well we're excited for this interview today and we welcome Dr. Anirogg Singh to the podcast. I'm Marcus Bauman and with me today is Dr. Ken Ford. Hello Marcus and hello Anirogg. So you grew up in India in Lucknow which is the capital of the most popular state in India. What was your childhood like? So I grew up in a small nuclear family and you know my parents were I don't know if folks in the audience know most of India till the 50s and 60s, a lot of people were on educated. My parents were actually the first generation to go to college after getting independence from the British and so there was a big sort of movement to push the next generation to go and do advanced studies and so I grew up in a very competitive environment where getting a higher education and excelling in education was sort of the prime focus of that generation, my generation that grew up in India. So it was an ultra competitive. I would bike one way 10 kilometers every day just to get to a English school to get my first prime read and secondary education. So it was hard but there was always a very clear focus of you know, Motu of what I needed to achieve. So given that competitive environment, what were you like as a kid? What were some of the things you enjoyed doing when you had time to do things beyond the educational pursuits? So I would say 80% of my time was spent in studies and competitions. I loved to write so that was my calling. I was writing a lot of English essays that would win competitions. I was also a sports incline. The kid used to play a lot of sports like badminton and basketball but again that somehow growing up with the clear focus on education that kind of got sidetracked. So I would always come the top in class from first grade to all the way to high school. So that was pretty much what defined me. I can see that we normally ask our guests about when they first became interested in science and I understand that early on your parents felt that you had an actual knack for biology that you had a particular strong point there and they started encouraging you to think about medical school. Is that right? How did that work out? Yeah, that's pretty much nobody in my family or even the extended family had ever gone to med school and being a doctor and going to med school is sort of the ultimate prize education. And I was very good. I was very good in biology. I would always top the pre-biology school exams. And so yeah, it's just kind of, you know, from there you go and you write a competitive exams that allow you to get into medical school in about a million kids between 17 to 21 years of age, write this exam and only 100 gets selected. So that's how I got into an actual biology. Wow, that's a pretty tight filter. From what I've heard from reliable sources, perhaps a little birdie that you started in medical school at only 18 years of age, is that right? That's correct. So in India, if you crack this particular national level exam and that's open for kids from straight out of high school, all the way to, you know, who are graduating college, if you crack the exam early on, you can get in medical school as early as 18. So, you know, at that time I thought I was very fortunate enough in hindsight, I think maybe a few more years of experience, you know, at that stage would have been a bit more maturity would have helped. But yeah, I was in medical school at 18. So this took you to India's Armed Forces Medical College for training in internal medicine. We understand that's one of the top medical schools in India, is that right? It is. So it's routinely ranked in the top three medical schools in India. One is the All Institute of Medical Sciences, which is Basin Delhi. The second is always the Armed Forces Medical College and there's a very healthy rivalry between these top three medical schools. So I got into AFMCA-18 and the whole idea behind the Institute is like would be the echo in the fear of Walter Reed or other medical institutes that are catering to training doctors for the Armed Forces. For any graduate of the Armed Forces Medical College, I understand it's typical for a young doctor to serve a few years in the Indian Army. We understand that you have an interesting story about how you ended up in the US rather than serving in the Indian Army. Sure. So in India, it's about five and a half to six years of medical school. And so when you graduate, you either get commissioned into the Indian Armed Forces as a medical doctor. The prerequisite is that you need to clear a medical exam before and I was flat-footed and that kind of stopped me from doing. So I was asked to not be in the Army because I was flat-footed and I was also more interested in doing medical research, which was the society that I was leading in my medical school. And so my interest in research led me to the US. So is that sort of how you decided to pursue a PhD in immunology? It seems like one might have led to the other. Yeah, I practiced actually for a few years after graduating. I went to practice in a lot of public hospitals. Really where medicine in India, that time, it still is an emerging country. Medical care is not always available in the remotest part of the nation. So I was doing that. And during that time, I felt as if I was just blindly treating the symptom, the allergy of these chronic, I see a lot of cancer patients, a lot of diabetics. And that often triggered the question, what if we could intervene early? That would be needed. And I felt the environment wasn't really there to ask those kind of questions. And I'd refer you as a practice. I started applying into research programs and almost got into almost all of them in the US. So what was your PhD research about? So I went to graduate school in University of Connecticut. The med school is based in Farmington, Connecticut. And that my PhD was actually studying immune responses and particularly immune responses that happened in a lot of emerging food allergies and things like chronic asthma. I was trained by amazing professors who gave me the, let's say, the scope to define. They saw that, you know, I was a young clinician who was asking the right questions. And so, yeah, my PhD was actually discovering a unique immune cell that could actually stop asthma. That's really interesting. So with that background for your research training and medical training as an internist, you accepted a position in 2009 with the Swiss-based company Nestle. It was at a time when the company was getting into the space between food and pharma. How did this move come about for you? Yeah, I think there's a transition in between. So in the laboratory, I was, there was a lot of other fellows training. And one of them actually was a naturopathic doctor who was in a similar, you know, K-award fellowship at the time, I think, from the national institute of health. And he was studying natural compounds, but he didn't have the expertise to just look at immune cells, et cetera. So when I started studying these natural compounds and he was looking at natural compounds coming from the stem of pineapples, actually. A lot of them are, one of them is called bromelain. And that had these amazing therapeutic properties against asthma. And so that got my interest and that led to a lot of publications. And Nestle was at that time, as you mentioned, getting into this space between food and pharma of medical foods and consumer health supplements, et cetera. And they were very interested in finding other new ways of natural ways of tackling food allergies, because they are big in the infant formula space. And so they also were looking for not pure PhDs, but physician scientists who knew how to run the gamut of clinical studies and to translate them into human settings with research questions. So yeah, 2009, they hired me. I was one of the, not the first, actually, only the second MD in a 300,000 employee company and did some fantastic work there. Sounds really interesting. And I can see how it fit with your background rather perfectly. You quickly became medical director at Nestle and started initiating clinical trials as we were discussing around food and our respiratory allergies. And I think these trials were conducted literally all over the world. And you also started doing research on aging and how the immune system declines with age. Can you talk about your key takeaways from your time at Nestle? Yeah, I think the two takeaways probably. One was it takes time to find, let's say, new, innovative natural ways to modulate the immune system or the human body in general. And how long it takes to from discovering at that time, we were studying a lot of probiotics and prebiotics that could modulate, they got microbiome and food allergy kids. And so my interest kind of started from there. And then Nestle got into, as you mentioned, they started a subsequent called Nestle Hell signs. And their products were all kind of fitting more into high protein supplementation, et cetera, for the aging population. And so I started looking at the immune system of these old folks. My takeaway was basically how long it takes to innovate in the field and how less of a science was actually happening in the nutrition field where people were just blending vitamins and minerals and without really knowing how there's interaction between different nutrients throwing them into supplements and mostly marketing driven. And so that led me to where I am. So it's an interesting course from a practicing physician to becoming a research scientist. I understand you had a mentor in the US who gave you some advice that led to that decision for you to sort of make that switch in your trajectory. Can you tell us about that? Yeah, it was, this is gosh, about 20 plus years back. I was in that phase where I wanted to keep a little bit of my clinical skills, see patients for a day or two and then do research. And then as I said, I've always been lucky and blessed with the great mentors and particularly one professor who was trained MD from Stanford and had discovered entity enough in the 80s. He trained me all the way and he told me, I really want to make it in research. You need to devote yourself and it's not one day a week you can do research. So I took that to heart and I took him as my role model and I've been fully focused in clinical and translational research since then. That's good advice he gave you. In 2014, you joined the Swiss based company, Amazonas as chief medical officer and you became the lead for their medical and clinical research strategies. Can you talk about the company and the work you do? Sure, so you know, all these years at Nestle, I had never imagined leaving and becoming sort of joining forces with entrepreneurs. And so I was introduced actually to the founders of Amazonas who were mostly professors who were based out of the Swiss Institute of Technology and they had this ideology behind Amazonas that they would bring the biotic approach to nutrition and by that I mean really deep science driven approach to discovering new natural compounds. And the second thing they told me, we have patient capital so we have raised money and where the investors are very patient and they're going to give us this amount of time to go and discover new natural compounds and take them to humans. So I felt that spoke to me the entrepreneurial nature of these founding scientists and the patient capital perspective. For our listeners, where you describe the relationship between Amazonas in timeline, sometimes it gets a little confusing. Sure. Amazonas is a parent Swiss company, the research company. Amazonas was always founded with the ideology sort of create the genetic of the nutrition space. So you know, bring in the deep biology, science driven approach to discovering new natural compounds and 10, 12 years after doing really the hard yards of research, Amazonas founded the timeline brand which is how the commercial products are sold under. So timeline is sort of the US brand and this US entity and Amazonas is the parent research arm based out of Switzerland. So you touched a bit on sort of this biotech approach to nutrition. Maybe for our listeners who don't have a good understanding of how that would transpire. Can you talk about that a little bit deeper, how you all use sort of hard biology in your nutritional approaches? Yeah. So the biotech approach is you take a deep dive into let's say commonly described, help benefit promoting foods and fruits and nuts, for example. At that time we were looking into this 10 plus years back. We started looking into the pomegranates. We started looking into berries. Now the original idea was you need the composite every bioactive and their hundreds of these beneficial compounds into inside pomegranate that you need the blend. And so when we started studying and there were already hundreds of let's say clinical studies and publication on why pomegranate was a super food. When you actually looked at the ensemble of the data, there was always mixed. There were trials that had some promise and there would be trials that showed really nothing. And so we drilled down, you know, we really started deconstructing the pomegranate and we found hundreds of compounds inside the pomegranate, which would even be different whether you source pomegranates from Israel or pomegranates from Spain or pomegranates from Azerbaijan. And so that led us to really starting to study how the gut microbiome was absorbing all these different bioactives and drilling down to really the key active that was responsible for a lot of those health promoting effects and that led to where we are. So the biotech approach essentially is today we are all taking vitamin C. We really don't know what we know. There are sources like oranges and citrus foods that are rich in vitamin C and we have some idea that it has these immune boosting effects but how does it work? Where does it get absorbed? Nobody really knows. The biotech approach equivalent is you know the active compound. You know its plasma levels that are needed to get a health benefit. You know how to boost it and you know the target and the mechanism of action of how the compound works and then you can you know translate it in different clinical settings. So that's the biotech approach much like how it would be in the pharmaceutical space. Makes a lot of sense and frankly much needed in the field so kudos to you all. We've heard you say that timeline is trying to be a disruptor in the field of longevity by acting on mitochondrial health. Before we dive into this could you first give our listeners a short primer on the role and importance of mitochondria? Yes sure absolutely. So mitochondria or an audience may have heard in school textbooks they are the powerhouse of the cell but they really like the batteries that keep you are you know if you think about your test lock or any car. They are the batteries of the car and you need them to function. You need them to get up from a chair. You need them. So you need to have the energy that these organelles are producing to move around to think clearly. So without mitochondria we wouldn't exist. So you know mitochondria think of them as energy factories and what happens with aging is that these energy factories get compromised and this declining mitochondrial health is actually a key hallmark of aging and there are other hallmarks phaging but I think one of the most amenable to intervention to improve health span in the aging spectrum. I think mitochondria improving mitochondrial health which is basically you know getting more energy so you have a little bit more left in the tank at the end of the day is probably the most realistic. So if a person is in good mitochondria health presumably as you mentioned they would have a good consistent supply of energy which is of course beneficial are there other benefits of good mitochondrial health? So absolutely I mean mitochondria are found in every cell type. The highest abundance of mitochondria is in organs that are very metabolic right so the skeletal muscle is one of the most metabolic organs so there are thousands of mitochondria in every skeletal muscle cell. The brain cells also again have a very high metabolic demand and they need a lot of energy in mitochondria to keep your cognition, cognitive abilities, the heart, the kidney you know other than the red blood cell mitochondria are probably essential to the function of every human cell type and so what happens with aging is there's a gradual decline in mitochondrial function and that's what you feel at a whole body level you feel declining levels of energy show up as fatigue as not being able to think clearly or not sleep properly. Absolutely and unfortunately one sees that often among friends and colleagues as we go through the process of living longer this might also be a good time to explain some terms mitochondrial biogenesis and also metophagy. Sure so the example I often give for biogenesis versus metophagy so today in the whole mitochondrial health field there are three categories of how you can boost mitochondrial health. One is biogenesis which means generating newer healthy mitochondria so the idea is that instead of a thousand if you had a two thousand mitochondria you would have more energy and that's the concept of biogenesis. The second let's say block of how you could improve mitochondrial health is by improving the efficiency of whatever you have. So if you have a thousand and mitochondria per cell type if you could make 500 more efficient you would get more energy per mitochondria and that there are nutrients that do that. The one area where there had never really been a nutrient described before that could improve mitochondrial health is through this pathway of mytoffagy. So in the life cycle of a mitochondria there's always a balance between healthy mitochondria and faulty mitochondria and with aging the balance shifts towards more faulty mitochondria and you need this process that always is in the background on a sort of auto loop running that's called mytoffagy which really means clearing away faulty mitochondria and this process slows down. It's similar to a toffagy. A toffagy is more of a whole cellular level and mytoffagy is a toffagy specific to the mitochondria. And so when this process slows down you just get more accumulation of faulty mitochondria and think of it like your trash bin in your house if it fills up and there's no more room to put more trash your house will not smell and that well and that's exactly what's happening at a cellular level. You made mention of the term health span so just wanted to revisit that for a second. I think it's important to point out that what you've been describing speaks to health span more so than life span and if I'm hearing you right the goal of timeline is to increase the number of years that a person can enjoy optimal health. This is also consistent with our philosophy here at IHMC. I want to talk a little bit about frailty which is caused by weakening of skeletal muscle and a whole host of other things that accompany this sort of frailty syndrome. It's a serious issue as we age can lead to falls, broken bones, particularly broken hips. The elderly quite often never recover fully from a fall that lands them in the hospital. So maintaining strength as we age is critical. This might be a good time to talk about your study that you conducted on individuals in the Dutch study. The Dutch are well known for their physical activity and in this study you compared very active seniors with sedentary couch potatoes. Can you talk about the origins of the study and what you found? Yeah sure. So when we started in this goes back to 10 plus years back we knew the compounds that we were discovering were hitting mitochondria and as we moved to human translation we wanted to explore which would be the most relevant starting populations to really trial and do first human clinical studies. And aging is a big stressor on mitochondrial health. This was well known. What we wanted to do was confirm those findings. Second really have a firm grasp of tools available in clinical trials that we could implement to see the effects of a lot of these act as we were discovering. And so we went a little bit naively to a research institute in Leiden in Netherlands and we started there recruiting for 70 plus population on one side we had these extremely fit older adults 70 to 75 years of age who were training for half marathons and the other we compared them to 70 75 year olds who are very sedentary pretty much on the path to frailty as you describe and they had various levels of declining muscle strength. It was really shocking as we looked through different batteries of tools in the clinic. That number one criteria we took muscle biopsies we put these folks into exercise testing and magnetic resonance scanning. This is a technique called magnetic resonance spectroscopy that allows you to study mitochondrial health in real time. And the answer was always mitochondria. These frail older adults had very poor mitochondrial health in their skeletal muscles whether you look through molecular ways and taking biopsies and looking for genomic or protein markers of mitochondria or non-invasively through exercise depletion of energy reserves. So the older adults who were very fed, very athletic had the mitochondrial health of very much 30, 40 year old person. Well, that's really interesting. You can see that just anecdotally in one's life when you see seniors that are just very active. They seem to have a lot of energy and the past one is always wondered is this a selection issue? In other words, the highly energetic do energetic things. And what you're demonstrating in a sense is that that's not the case that mitochondrial impairment is actually a hallmark of pre frailty development. So the arrow of drugstuality is more clear here. And I think it's a really interesting study. And in general, exercise is incredibly important. Marcus leads our health span resilience and performance research focus area here at IHMC. And he likes to talk about exercise as medicine that if you could write a prescription for exercise and it was easy as taking a pill, it would be heavily prescribed. Can you talk on the importance of exercising general? Sure. I mean, I couldn't have phrased it better. I mean, exercise is a miracle drug. And as a physician, if I could prescribe it to most of the aging population, I wouldn't. The days I practice, I was even to diabetics. You would see the effects of just moving a bit more or doing 20, 30 minutes. And I've done enough trials with high protein and exercise to know how exercise actually works through boosting mitochondrial health. Problem with exercise is the compliance in in different populations, whether it's older adults or those with chronic conditions that impact muscle and mobility. So yeah, different forms of any form of exercise. It's the number one recommendation. I I 200% agree with what you said. Marcus said. You know, it's interesting too, because as as there are have been attempts to drug exercise or come up with an exercise mimetic, what seems to always be missing is the thousands upon thousands of signaling cascades that you'll never recapitulate with a pill. You may be able to target one of them or two of them, but the idea of ever recapitulating the benefits, it's just sort of hard to imagine. But that's great to hear your take on that. As you just talked about the 70 year old triathletes versus sedentary individuals, the 70 year olds having mitochondrial health of, you know, folks 30, 40 years younger. It's pretty amazing. In recent years, we've seen an explosion of research and interest in health span resilience as well as lifespan. Can you talk about some of the key tenants of healthy aging from your perspective? Yeah, you know, I always say to me, they're sort of three or let's say three to five pillars of healthy aging. One is definitely exercise, physical activity. Second is the diet, right? So if you're eating well balanced, like this intermittent fasting or or calorie restriction, not that you need to starve yourself, but you know, if you're watching what you eat and you're getting enough fiber and enough protein in your diet, that is helping you your muscle quality, then those two are the big pillars. And then oftentimes, and I see that even in my mid 40s, I see that I want to exercise, but you know, just whole professional day with kids. At the end, somehow you become confined to being a weekend warrior kind of a person doing exercise only in the weekends. And that's where I feel advanced nutrition. And that's where I feel a lot of the work we have been doing helps sort of just give it a little bit more push and maintenance to your other things you're doing. And the other two that I particularly think impact healthy aging and mitochondrial health, one, the fourth one is the sleep, just having a good sleep and how that impacts your mitochondrial health and overall biology and keeping the different hallmarks phaging ways is what we will see is probably a lot of new science coming in that direction. And the fifth is just, you know, stress and having your loved ones around you and keeping your stress levels low. So those probably are my five mantras for healthy aging. Hmm. Looping back briefly to the Dutch study and our discussion about exercise as medicine and how, you know, compliance is difficult. Imagine if instead of making your mitochondria, similar to the mitochondria in a person 30 years younger, if it were your skin, everyone would be exercising or your hair. I think a lot of it is because people don't physically see it when they look in the mirror and they're not thinking of their mitochondria, but exercise is absolutely critical. And fondling up on that, IHMC recently opened our new health span resilience and performance research complex. And Marcus, we get a lot of questions about this from our listeners because they've been following it. Could you take just a brief aside and tell the listeners about the capacity and capabilities of the new research complex and what is focused on? Sure. Now this is very exciting for IHMC and for the region here in Northwest Florida. Our complex was designed carefully so that we could do much of what we've just talked about in terms of understanding the mechanisms by which we all can improve health span resilience or performance, whether that be cognitive performance, physical performance, or what I always like to think of as well as performance at the individual cell level or the organ level. So we want to ultimately improve resilience and performance of the individual at the whole body level, but in order to do that, sometimes there's great opportunity to target and study much smaller puzzle pieces, so to speak. So we've designed a building to enable us to do that. And I think you'd be particularly interested. One of the key laboratories in the building is a mitochondrial energetics core. So we can do a whole genome sequencing. We can do whole proteome analyses, epigenomic analyses, and then mitochondrial health and stem cell biology studies along with the analyses of the whole human. So we're very excited about this complex. We have a large-scale intervention core in the building as well for clinical trials and a clinical research unit which enables us to screen individuals, test them, collect biospecimens from them, blood, muscle, adipose tissue, urine samples, things that we can use and leverage to understand the impact of interventions. So it's an exciting time for HMC. It is, Marcus. We've already discussed some of the consequences of poor metabolic health and that elites people vulnerable to many disorders, type two diabetes and cardiovascular disease and a host of other issues. And although it is well appreciated that metabolic health is important, I think it was the University of North Carolina recently released or a couple years ago a study that found only 12% of the US population are metabolically healthy. And this is not limited to the US. If you travel and look around, you can see it. Declining metabolic health seems to be a global issue and I just wondered, under a few could talk about that a little. Yeah, I mean, this is at the heart of metabolic health you're seeing that in the developed world. Actually, a lot of the research we stumbled upon was how metabolic health was being shaped by the gut microbiome and how the gut microbiome has evolved across different parts of the world depending on the diet people have been taking. And so we went to US and Canada. We looked at folks if they were making these healthy sort of gut metabolites after taking different nutrients. We saw actually you said 12%. That's pretty much the 12%. We saw that had a gut, had a gut microbiome. So now as I was hearing you, I was wondering if you know, those are those with the healthy gut microbiome are the ones with the healthy metabolic health. Irrespective of that, I think we are in a crisis in all these new drugs that you hear about these lifestyle drugs are trending targeting GLP1 and trying to counterag. But I see that as a very short circuit answer to the crisis. But certainly tackling mitochondrial health is key to improving metabolic health. So glad we talked about that. Let's jump back into your work at timeline where you're investigating natural compounds that target mitochondrial health. And during some of your work you found that the molecule Eurelith and A out shown every other molecule you were studying. Eurelith and A is a natural compound produced by gut bacteria from ingested allagetanins and allagic acid. Complex polyphenols found in foods such as pomegranate berries and nuts. Can you give listeners a short overview of the importance and role of these allagetanins? Sure. Yeah. So allagetanins are basically complex polyphenols and most fruits and nuts have a lot of these polyphenols and things like quercetin. Allagetanins are found and rich and pomegranates, red berries and blackberries and to a certain extent in walnuts and pecans. And so they're abundant and we're all getting exposed to it if you're eating the right fruits and nuts and diet. And the LHTANins just to finish the loop are in when you peel a pomegranate, they're not in those shiny red arrows. They're actually in the in those white part of the layering that keeps the arrow inside the pomegranate and most people throw the white part away so that goes all the LHTANins. But what we found was that a lot of these allagetanins get metabolized by the gut microbiome into smaller, simpler phenol metabolites that get digested and get released as postbiotic. So that's how we stumble upon a lot of our discovery. It's really, really interesting. You know, just from a public health standpoint, people are unaware of the components of, for example, a pomegranate that they should not toss away. So with that message needs to get out. It's really interesting. You know, I've heard some of the same things about the peels and various components of other products, whether it be watermelon oranges and so forth. So I think we probably as a public health outreach should do a better job of explaining some of that. So given the importance of the microbiota in this process you just talked about, are there lifestyle behaviors that can improve your gut microbiome population to increase how much uralithane you can pull from food sources? So uralithane is not found commonly in foods. It is mostly released in the circulation post-metabolism of these allagetanins by the gut microbiome. Now you can reshape your microbiome to a certain extent by eating a healthy diet. So for folks, I mean, we've done studies all around the world and looking into who's making uralithane and who's not making uralithane. And what we see is that the people who make uralithane actually are eating the most healthiest diet, rich and fruit and nuts. A, B, they're eating a lot of fiber. C, when we look at the gut microbiome and we sequence it, it's clear that their gut microbiome is very rich in diverse. And so just the answer lies in you eating the right healthy diet that has probably a good portion of fermented foods and fiber. Myself, I'll give you my example. So I grew up in India, took a lot of antibiotics, which is pretty much the norm. The moment you sneeze, a doctor in India will give you an antibiotic and uses rampant. And so I think if your microbiome is kind of conditioned in the first years of development, then at least my experience has been that even if I try to eat a lot of healthy diet, rich in fiber and fermented foods, it's very difficult even today. I can drink six glasses of juice. My body just refuses to make uralithane. Following up on our previous question, assuming now the hypothetical perfect gut microbiome and the perfect glygitane conversion, is it possible to generate enough uralithane A through the diet alone to observe any considerable benefit? So I would say out of the 1200 plus participants, I look at the cross multitude of clinical trials, I would say there is about 10 to 12 percent who have that magic threshold, meaning they are following a healthy lifestyle, they eating the right diet and they have the right gut microbiome. Now we have actually, we did a study a few years back where we gave about 100 individuals in the US metropolis, it was actually downtown Chicago, we took middle-aged adults and we gave them glass of concentrated pure ponderine juice, which theoretically had all the peel and the end of the alleged tenons in it. You could boost the number from 12 to 40 percent, but there were still the 60 percent who even were exposed to the perfect diet where you didn't see any uralithane being produced. So the answer is probably yes to a certain extent and we have studied this is 10 percent as I call them the blessed people because they have the best of everything, they have the uralithane levels that probably even the highest dosing of direct dietary supplementation can achieve. And it's interesting there's a study from a Spanish group that studied these folks who make uralithane who are a bit overweight, uralithane protects them, gives them like cardio-metabolic protection and that was I found very interesting. So yes, there are benefits that you can derive and there are people who get enough from the diet. So we want to talk about a study a paper you published in 2016 just briefly as an aside before that, I'm curious you mentioned antibiotics as one means of sort of disrupting the microbiome and therefore impacting your ability to release uralithane. Are there other particular impactors on the microbiome dietary or otherwise that you all have identified that impact that 60 percent or upwards of 80 plus percent of folks? I would say lifestyle choices being sedentary also being your physical activity levels impacted. I would turn the answer a bit differently. What we find very unique is that the same 10 to 20 percent that have the ability to make uralithane also have the right let's say environment to produce a lot of other health promoting postbiotics, right? So their bacteria are making short chin fatty acids, they're making other maybe carcrisis or uncharacteris molecules that have these immense human health benefits. So your question was, is there hope for the remaining 60 percent? And I guess antibiotic you should be discouraged unless it's really needed. I think people there are studies where taking the right probiotics along with the right fiber has boosted a lot of these postbiotic levels and the answer is not in a single probiotic. It's really a whole blend of kind of ecosystem that you need to conceive in a pill which again is a difficult task. But yeah, we're getting there as a sort of science movement under the microbiome. Oh, that's great. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, locomotion, health span, resilience, and performance. So the 2016 paper, which really was your first glimpse, at least from what we can tell into the potential of uralithane. The study was entitled, uralithane induces mitophagy and prolongs lifespan and sea elegance and increases muscle function and rodents. Can you please talk about the origins of this and the results? Yeah, sure. So this is really the first landmark publication which stems from, let's say, the first six to eight years of our research efforts. Most of our research back then and even today is done in partnership with leading professors around the world. And so we are actually based out of the Swiss Institute of Technology here in Luzan, which is like the MIDF Europe and we have access to one of the smartest professors who study mitochondria and aging and longevity pathways. And so we were working with Professor Johan Overix, who's very well known in the field for his research over the last 30 plus years in metabolic and mitochondrial role in human health. And he has been instrumental in the discovery of many other natural compounds like NAD modulators and restriotrol. And so most of his research that we were collaborating starts in nematodes and sea elegance, which is a worm that lives about 20 days. And so you can take libraries of natural compounds and put them in these microfluidic devices that have these nematodes. And you can see which one is going to have, you know, which one is going to boost their lifespan and health span, meaning these worms become more mobile. They eat better and they just live longer. And so when we were looking at these many actors inside the pomegranate, we also put in these byproducts, these uralitins that had mostly been described as waste products. And we didn't tell them, of course, we blinded this lab. And he came actually running across the road. They're just based across the road from us in the innovation park. And he said, what is this molecule? Because its caloric restriction is always the control. And it boosts lifespan in these worms by about 50% and closes one, we know molecule that does about 3540s metformin. This molecule is doing about 45% of lifespan extension. And the worms are moving like as if the young worms would move. And so that was the ureka moment. And we had also given them the alleged attenins in these experiments. And they were not doing anything in these assays. So we zeroed in on these uralitins. We started looking at it and there's actually multiple uralitins, say, the uralitinae, BC and D, all the way to EFG, I think. Uralitinae is the most circulating uralitins. So when we studied all the uralitins, uralitinae had the best effect. And so that's how this is the summary of that work. From there, we gave it to older animal models of aging rodents that started running 40% longer. And they had more muscle strength, about 10% more muscle strength. And we zeroed in that the effect was because of the mitophagy impact on the muscle mitochondria. So that's the nature medicine. When the professor was doing this scan, you mentioned metformin and other things that you looked at. Did you look at rapamycin? We did. And rapamycin is also well known to induce longevity. I think it does it about 25, 30% in those assays. NAD modulators are their respiratory, does it by 15% as well. And these all like in the case of rapamycin, a very different mechanism of action. So it's kind of interesting. Yes. Again, back I think Mark just mentioned that there is no one magic bullet, right? There are all these different pathways that probably something like exercise heads. But one molecule probably can probably mitophagy is a key process that you need to re-waken during the aging process. But yeah, rapamycin goes through a different one called mTOR. As we've been discussing just now, uralitinae has been well demonstrated at this point to activate metophagy. I wonder is the underlying mechanism of action known in detail or is it really a case of a strong association with the key regulators of a topology in my topogy like MPK and mTOR? So we know it doesn't go through mTOR. We know it goes through AMPK and phosphate and PK. But is that a downstream signaling cascade or short answer is we haven't figured it out but we are close to figuring out the target of uralitinae. Yeah, I wasn't suggesting that it would go through mTOR. I was trying to give an example of an association versus understanding the mechanism in depth. Yeah, so it's you know, the pathways that we think probably are the closest are probably all the oxidative stress pathways that link up to a lot of these polyphenols and then we'll describe to activate actually. Makes sense. As we've discussed with regard to some of the work in aging as well as the cendary lifestyle, there's a progressive decline in the cell's capacity to eliminate its dysfunctional elements by autophagy and in the case of mitochondria mitophagy. Is this this decrease in the autophagy and recycling of dysfunctional mitochondria and skeletal muscle has been closely linked to poor muscle health and quality and older adults? In 2019, you had a paper that published the results of your first human clinical trial in which you administered either a single dose or multiple doses of uralitinae to sedentary adults but otherwise healthy since that's one biomarker of health. The results of this trial were quite impressive where you surprised and could you talk about those results? Yeah, sure, absolutely. So, you know, again, this is bringing sort of the biotech approach to nutrition. Most strategies would go blend uralitinae and start selling or run a small scale study. We wanted to actually characterize first the safety and the pharmacokinetics, meaning the exposure. So, what is the minimalificacious dose of uralitinae? So, and we knew we had done this Dutch study which we talked before where we knew sedentary older adults had some kind of compromised mitochondrial and skeletal muscle. So, we when we started with a cohort of older adults which we gave a dose of 250 milligrams of uralitinae which translated from the dose that we were seeing effects in different other models of aging. And then we kept once we showed safety and bi-villability, we kept increasing it up till two grams. Now, at about a gram, from 250, 500 to a gram, we saw a linear increase in exposure. So, more uralitinae showing up in the plasma of these older adults after a gram, we sort of saturated the system, meaning it's just not a, you know, every time you double the dose from one to two gram or four grams. So, we started, we focused very quickly in the 500 and the gram dose of uralitinae and we took muscle biopsies after a longer intervention of four weeks and we basically compared them to a placebo group which was similar to the 70 plus sedentary group that I described before had four mitochondrial health in their muscles. And when we saw what shocked us in all the collaborators at the time was how very nicely we were able to see in a dose response manner. A lot of these mitochondrial genes come back to life so sort of from being downregulated in the muscle to very highly upregulated in a very linear fashion. And then at the plasma level, sort of markers we were seeing and this is where you do a sort of a whole metabolomics approach looking at thousands of circulating metabolites. The key metabolites that we were picking up were mostly linked to mitochondrial health and fatty acid oxidation pathways suggesting that overall mitochondrial health in these individuals was improving. So, again, for your audience, most of these markers we look in the biopsies are linked to either biogenesis or typical marker. There's PGC1 alpha or mitophagy and the typical marker we look at or set of markers we look at are linked to markers such as Parkinson's. So, that's how we know mitophagy and biogenesis was happening. So, that in a nutshell is the first translation findings in humans. It's very cool. Lippenback for just a second. We also know exercise activates mitophagy. Certainly improves mitochondrial function and induces mitochondrial bowel genesis. What are the key cellular differences or mechanistic differences between exercise and uralithane? Are you aware of any in terms of the mechanism of action? If I had to compare, I would say uralithane is like almost an exercise my medic in terms that it's hitting the same mitochondrial pathways. Exercise may have more effects on fuel utilization and body composition that we don't immediately see in let's say a month long or changes in let's say muscle mass that we see. For example, mostly we see the improvement is in muscle quality. The other consistent finding across the randomized trials we see is a dampening of the chronic inflammation that the company is aging. So, those are the similarities in sort of little disemlarities. But on the mitochondria with respect to mitophagy and biogenesis, it probably, I mean the first time you started showing in different conferences this day that a lot of people were asking if this was an exercise my medic and I still think it is like an exercise my medic. Your research that you've just been discussing on uralithane led to the development of mydo-pure. The first postbiotic nutrient has been shown to trigger mitophagy by targeting cellular decline. In 2022, you published a paper titled uralithane improves muscle strength, exercise performance and biomarkers of mitochondrial health in a randomized trial in middle-aged adults. Your subjects in this study were healthy but overweight middle-aged adults who received oral doses of mydo-pure. Can you talk about the design of this study and the key findings? Sure, absolutely. So, after the first publication in 2019, in parallel, we also got the approval from the FDA to recognizing uralithane as a food ingredient and we started making plans for commercial launch of this product, the mitophure in the United States. And as a trialist, as a physician scientist, my first inclination and my first gut reaction was the perfect consumer is an aging consumer 65, 70-year-olds who had purchased this product and thinking about their muscle health and muscle energetics and quality. What we started seeing very fast was a lot of younger 40, 50-year-olds were purchasing this and that led to what kind of data would they expect? What would we see? Because that led to the design of this particular randomized clinical trial where we said, okay, let's go after the younger population of 40 to 60-year-olds who may have already started sort of on the journey of declining muscle and mitochondrial health and we chose folks who are sedentary and overweight with the idea that that sort of back to our metabolic health discussion earlier that that would be a stressor on their mitochondria and we would be able to let's see see effects. So this was a three-arm study. We knew the two doses from our previous nature metabolism phase one study of that Eurolotinate 500 milligram gram would give us a signature of improved mitochondrial health. We went longer so this is a three-arm placebo control each arm being around 30 subjects average age was about 50, two years BMI was they were not obese but they were almost obese of BMI of around 29 and these folks were sedentary they were you know most of their participants were not your standard physically active middle-aged folks so we did a four-month intervention with assessments looking at physical performance and muscle strength at baseline in comparing to two and four months and we did an incremental some maximal exercise test to calculate impacts on their endurance as well. So in a summary what we saw in this trial was on the physiology without changing and we gave them of course advice not to change their physical activity levels and we recorded their dietary records through the course they didn't not without changing their diets or physical activity levels after four months with both doses of mitochondria compared to the placebo arm we saw about a 10 to 12 percent increase in muscle strength and in their higher doses we saw clinically relevant improvements in these folks walking further so this is a test called the six-minute walk test that looks at the distance you can walk in these folks walked about 33 35 meters more compared to the other groups and we saw even almost a 10 percent increase in VO2 peak VO2 levels at the higher doses and we did biopsies and plasma withdraws and looked at all kinds of metabolomics and we were able to show the same effects on mitochondrial signatures and at the metabolic level that we saw in the older adults in this population. For our listeners I think you mentioned it earlier but talk about the content of each package of mitochondria it's 500 milligrams as I remember is that right? Yes so that's the commercial dose 500 milligrams is sufficient for to keep your mitochondria happy as I would say but there are folks who sometimes are chronically fatigued or inflamed and always they feel they have some sort of stress in the system and they do go higher because the gram dose has shown sort of even more incremental benefits and so those are the two doses but the package so we have two products actually one is a pill is a soft gel that has each pill delivers two 15 milligrams so you need to take two a day and then we have food flavored actually a pomegranate very flavored sachet a lot of sports teams actually prefer to put that in smoothies versus taking the pills and each packet delivers 500 milligrams a few of it. Yeah I have been taking my reappearance since it first came on the market and it's sort of intermittently take a thousand milligrams but most mornings 500 I hope my saying that doesn't discourage people from using your product as I will look at him it doesn't work. No but that's what actually what I do there are days where I feel a bit underslap or fatigued I do exactly what you're saying I take a gram and days where I'm already doing my physical activity 30 minutes of running I tend to take the 500 dose. Same here I'm travel also can really. Yeah, I agree. So a little different track in this question but it's just the curiosity many therapies targeting mitochondria only seem to be effective when there is some type of existing dysfunction and those therapies then if you're fortunate perhaps restore the function but you don't see it improving it above a normal healthy baseline in most cases. So what is it about healthy mitochondria versus diseased or dysfunctional mitochondria where there seems to be sort of a cap on physiologic function or is that just the perception from the literature. Do you have a good answer for that? To be honest no but we ask this question in a different way after doing the studies in older adults where aging was a stressor and in the 40-50 year olds where being overweight and compromised metabolic health was a stressor. We started to hear these stories from sports teams you know we heard about two of the Fran cyclists who were buying a product and I asked the same question as like presumably these athletes are the peak of their not just mitochondrial health but probably muscle health you know they're above the curve of what healthy human being in their you know peak physical performance would be and it turns out that a lot of these folks over-trained and sometimes they get also inflamed and actually one of the top sports researchers started to give mitochondria to an NB athlete who was getting injured repeatedly and she then came to me and said let's do a clinical study so the short answer is that maybe in the case where overtraining is happening or even if you know these individuals have a VO2 max of about 65-70 in a sort of recovery phase it makes sense to bring the mitochondria back to homostasis and accelerate mytoffidic. So just tying in this idea of exercise as potentially synergistic with your Lithuanae or other approaches to improve mitochondria health and I think we sort of hit on this already but you know if exercise were indeed a pill it would be prescribed to everyone and unfortunately the healthcare industry doesn't really provide tangible exercise prescriptions in most cases which seems to be a problem but instead they prescribe pills you mentioned antibiotics and others but what we're talking about in terms of mitochondria and its effects as a supplement it seems to be you know a supplement to other lifestyle behaviors that are healthy such as regular exercise rather than a replacement for exercises that how you see it. Absolutely 200% and I think I mentioned that I see it as a tart pillar that you know using nutrients that are well characterized well studies such as mitochondria that complement the two key pillars which absolutely need to be there and that's your exercise and physical activity levels and what you're eating in terms of health promoting diets or eating a metabolic challenging diet. That's how I see it that these are complementary strategies and we are actually now doing several trials with exercise plus your Lithuanae or comparing high protein in older addels to high protein plus mitochondria to see if we can even break antibiotic resistance to high protein and things like that. Very interesting. I understand shifting a little bit here that you have found lots of interesting sources of your Lithuanae and the one that the aforementioned birdie told me about was the Iberian pigs in Spain so I'm quite a fan of Iberian pigs the ones with the black feet you know they're super delicious and these pigs eat acorns pretty much exclusively and as we understand it acorns are a rich source of the logic tannins so as a result did you find your Lithuanae in the ham meat itself? That's true that's correct so one of the first challenges we were asked was to show that the molecule mitochondria was absolutely identical to the natural uralitinae molecule and so we did these extensive studies where actually in this part of Spain where you know as you mentioned correctly acorns have one of the highest content even more than pomegranates for alleged tannins and we only know that a lot of these Iberian pigs in the wild in Spain are eating them and so we went and basically bought a lot of from different butchery stores in this part of Spain. Iberian ham and we started looking if uralitinae was found naturally there and at low and bowl it was actually in considerable levels. The other sources we found a uralitinae albeit very low levels where some of these oak aged whiskeys and oak aged wines because oak is also very rich in alleged tannins. So there you go you've heard it from the expert eat delicious Iberian pork preferably as ham and have some whiskey sounds like a red wine. It's like a deal yeah not too much I'm just a little supplement it with might appear. We at IGMC have a very strong interest in osteoarthritis as well as a research focus so I want to switch gears to a paper you had an aging cell. This showed mydepear's potential to improve mitochondrial health in human cartilage itself. Osteoarthritis being one of the most common joint diseases leading to a major major cause of physical disability. In this study you demonstrated that supplementation with mydepear for eight weeks only protected against osteoarthritic disease progression in an experimental model. Previous research showed that mydepear could improve mitochondrial health and muscle function in both older and middle aged adults as we talked about. Can you discuss the potential mydepear supplementation to reduce arthritis disease progression and you know just overall benefit joint health. Sure yeah so I think this is a very collaborative and very excellent piece of evidence we were collaborating with the scripts research in shooting la holla with the group of Martin Lodz and he had seen impaired atophagy in mytoffagy in human connoisseites from osteoarthritic patients and he was looking at solutions that could recover or boost atophagy in mytoffagy in those models and so we collaborated and what he basically showed was that there was basically less damage cartilage degeneration in the joints of these osteoarthritic models in rodents there was less inflammation and joint pain but the more key stuff was when you actually took from many osteoarthritic patients connoisseites and you saw the compromise atophagy when you actually in in ex vivo and cell culture put those with mydepear url tenei that you could actually bring a lot of their mitochondria and you could rewire atophagy and boost mytoffagy and so we've been talking we haven't to be honest we haven't yet translated those findings into randomized clinical trial but we were discussing and that's probably something we'll do in the future that's exciting and certainly a need for anything that would improve osteoarthritis and cartilage issue is just major as people pass through life yeah mobility in general right I mean if you can hit on muscle muscle joints and inflammation and one sort of then you have us good solution absolutely much as we were just discussing of the research involving uralithin a supplementation really has been focused on skeletal muscle and that makes sense for lots of reasons as well as you just mentioned cartilage cells an oral dose of uralithin a would be expected to have effects on other mitochondrial dense tissues I would imagine and so I was wondering have there been any research looking at effects observed in tissues like liver or cardiac tissue we are still a very small research focused nutrition company and so you know all the hard yards as you pointed out have focused on health span and muscle longevity a lot of people since the 2016 and 19 publication have a lot of academic groups have picked up the interest in the molecule so if I had to summarize I think the interest today is mostly in three directions and I'll tell you where we are now focusing our efforts so the buck Institute of Aging has found uralithin A to be out of hundreds of natural molecules that they have screened in my topology to actually clear up the waste in neuron cells and cognitive declines so they have published multiple papers recently showing how uralithin A is able to delay or reverse a lot of the cognitive decline and again as you were mentioning in mitochondrial dense cells like the neurons that get compromised because of four mitochondrial health and then a lot of metabolic health and GI research coming out of University of Louisville and University of Kentucky showing impacts on insulin resistance and metabolic models of Neffald fatty liver so we are our efforts today are actually starting up and we are trying to publish our findings on cardiac we have some excellent data using transmission electron microscopy and how aging hearts just you know the mitochondria and aging hearts totally lose their structure and become like old folks who don't want to talk to each other they fragment and the christay just is like burns spaghetti and by giving uralithin A supplementation we can pretty much bring the mitochondria and cardiac tissue back to sort of a very youthful state so this is something we are looking forward to publish that is interesting as I was wondering about cardiac tissue we also discussed you mentioned the buck Institute we discussed uralithin A at length on episode 118 with Julie Anderson from the buck yeah so Julie is doing great work on exactly what I described on it's the impact of my topology and the decline of my topology in the aging brain and how and and I think her recent publications have shown that in different models of neurodegeneration uralithin A was probably one of the few things that was able to rescue so we are very excited and her group and there's another group in the national Institute of Aging is the group of Willembor just published that not only as a therapeutic strategy but even if you most of these models of neurodegenerated decline develop it later in the middle ages as they would say and only then the intravene Willembor's group has shown that if you intervene early on right from the young age that even uralithin A has a preventive effect so we are very excited but it's promise on brain aging and we are looking to collaborate now with few groups on translating this in humans. So the research reported in these papers and others that we've been discussing are representative of why there is so much excitement today about uralithin A. In terms of a new research you have a number of studies in the pipeline that you mentioned looking at uralithin A's potential including some studies where it's taken in conjunction with exercise potentially looking for synergism. You have a study we understand involved it's a randomized controlled trial in collaboration with both the Buck Institute and Gertel University to see if uralithin A can improve the immune health of middle aged adults by improving mitochondrial function of mitochondrial health. How far along is this trial and can you talk a little bit about it because the immune system you mentioned inflammation earlier but a direct effect on the immune system is a really interesting direction for this. Yeah sure well for your listeners I mentioned I'm a training immunologist and for almost last 15 years I've been harboring this thought that all these trials have been running extremely take in muscle aging take a lot of time to not only conduct but I have a hard time convincing 75 year olds to undergo a muscle biopsy twice the thrice during the course of a clinical study and I was always wondering could you resort to something less non-invasive take a few drops of blood and study systemically the effect and maybe that would give you a quicker and easier readout so we started looking at white blood cells and storing them so we had banged them from our 2009 study and we very recently we said okay let's look at the mitochondrial gene signature on peripheral blood leukocytes which are these white blood cells to see if what we were seeing in muscle would be recapitulated in these immune cells and lo and behold in that trial that was published in 2019 we saw a similar signature so that kicked off the idea to actually design full-scale randomized clinical trial and we started collaborating with professor Eric Werdain the buck and another professor in Goth University professor Floren Dretton who had just described another paper in a rodent model of cancer where he showed that uralitane was actually reviring and boosting my topology in these teethels that you need to fight off infections and cancer and so we designed this trial in 2022 we started recruitment 23 and it has just finished the buck has earlier in the year finished all the analysis and what we have done which probably makes this a very unique study is that we have done deep immune phenotyping now what that means is with a very small amount of blood you can look at 40 different immune populations and look at 80 different immune markers so in one go you can characterize the effect of molecule like uralitane on not just your entire immune system but the mitochondrial health of each of the immune cells that run around in our bodies and what we see and this was just presented it earlier I believe in May and will again be presented soon in another meeting called aging research in Copenhagen to summarize is that mitochondria intake in middle age atlas was able to boost the number of cd8 naive teethels now these are cells that decline with aging they are more your stem cell like teethels that as we age we lose percentage in our blood so it might appear was able to boost the numbers of these stem cell driven cd8 teethels and then they had more mitochondria they had more pgc1 alpha in the immune cells and they function better so if you put a bacteria like ecoli and system the immune cells would fagusate those better so these are our first findings and we're in the process of writing it up so earlier you mentioned that overtraining might induce mitochondrial dysfunction and there's another recently completed randomized controlled trial that I want to talk about with elite runners and this trial was to assess exactly that whether overtraining does induce mitochondria dysfunction and perhaps more importantly whether your uralith and a supplementation has an impact on muscle recovery because of our work at ichemc with military populations and others were particularly interested in this kind of thing so I wondered if you would tell us about the key takeaways from this trial and what you learned sure so this is a work done with the group of professor Luis work in australian catholic university in melburn and her group has probably led the whole field of sports research in terms of studying the number of intervention and so she came gosh in 21 she came to us and she wanted to test uralytane if it would improve a performance and be would help accelerate recovery in these middle and long distance runners and the problem was we realized a lump to a lumpics game in between and a lot of these runners were training for a lumpics and so it took us a while to find 40 plus highly competitive elite runners but what we did this study and what we see in this study is essentially that after four weeks of supplementation in this very elite population we see about a 5% increase in VO2 max which is a big deal for this population compared to placebo we don't see that big an effect on performance we do see about a 2% improvement which i believe was this is still unpublished but it was not statistically significant but the key data that's coming out from this is that the recovery is much better so if you look at markers of muscle damage like creatinine kinase that are you know with the overtraining that just peak up in the blood of these athletes you kind of blunt the muscle damage response and the athletes felt less fatigue so you know in most sports they give you these sort of subjective RPE ratings have perceived exertion scales and the athletes and the might appear group felt less fatigue compared to so yeah so we think the recovery piece and that's what we hear routinely actually from a lot of athletes that they have blunted the inflammation and they have better recovery less muscle damage that's seeming to be the primary beneficial effect these days from ketone ester supplementation you know early days it was thought to be massively performance enhancing because you would see it in tour de france athletes benefiting and it looks now like it's that's possible but it looks much more likely that is beneficial recovery and won't surprise me and i think ketones also an alternative fuel switch so i'm sure they're having an impact on mitochondrial health and there's big you know sort of interaction between right and yeah muscle damage inflammation and mitochondrial right they they also suppress inflammation and so i'm starting to think of it more on those lines than as the initially you were you know we were thinking of it more in terms of strictly fuel and thinking more now in terms of signaling functions yeah others yeah so continuing along these lines i understand that there are even more studies in works and you know with this much interest in uralith and a it's not surprising that the marketplace is suddenly flooded with all kinds of products you can't really tell by looking at them online what's in them and do they even contain any uralith and a how is timeline dealing with this and do you have any advice for the consumers i'm sure after listening to this interview many listeners are going to think oh this is interesting but then they go online and it's just the wilderness of products yeah you know this is this let's say the problem aspect of the vitamins minerals and supplement space right you have a trendy scientifically studied new ingredient and suddenly as you saying the whole market place is flooded in fact there's a recent publication from a group in the national university of Singapore that looked at a lot of the longevity products on an ad and uralith and a and actually in this uralith and a they found only two out of all the products that met the label claim we can confirm but i suspect those two are our products we have taken a look at multiple different products out there and i can put my reputation here on the line by saying two-thirds of them are exactly what you said they don't even have a trace of the active molecule so that's the problem let's say you do 15 years of research you get the grass approval you study it clinically and that's what you're recommending but then you have this competition so i have only advice that you know be careful we want to take the product that is clinically backed and that is approved by FDA and not if selling for half the price but actually may not have anything in there so yeah this is a rampant problem and in a nutraceutical business isn't it i mean we see this a lot with you know there's a growth factor that's been studied and and people understand that it might be beneficial to muscle and therefore we're going to find it in multiple supplements whether it's actually there or not and so kudos to you for investigating this and you know it's unfortunate but the consumer needs to have the data to be informed yeah and i think that's where we separate you know our north star always has been evidence-based science and bringing the data and as a small company today as you were saying we have now partnered with the national initiative aging national cancer institute all kinds of top universities that are studying everything from cpd cancer to prediabetes with or without exercise so that's the way to take it forward is to raise the bar and soon i believe the ones that have no science will disappear on your mark this has been a really fun and fascinating discussion switching gears maybe to a little bit of your free time if you have any there in Switzerland you've been there 16 years have you done any skiing or hiking in the Swiss Alps oh yeah i just love hiking i mean this is um you know one of the when i moved from the u.s. to Switzerland i thought this was a two-year griggin i would be back either in the states or in my home country but over the years it just you know the quality they just the flexibility that you know from our office you don't see it but i see the alps in just 20 minutes away you can start climbing a beautiful mountain and see the lake so hiking is definitely always every weekend if the weather holds it's a good hike skiing i do it with my daughter she's a good skier but not a too big a fan that sounds like me i spend a lot of time in Wyoming and what i mean is famous for skiing in Jackson but and that's okay but i much prefer hiking hiking it's just i think it's good not only for your body but of course your brain is part of your body but it's it's good cognitively as well i think can psychologically absolutely well we want to thank you for being our guest today we will be sure to keep an eye on the many clinical trials you have in the pipeline and wish you the best of success in all of that great work yeah sure it was pleasure absolutely pleasure talking with your boat and yeah offline we can chat if there are possibilities to do something there in Florida with you guys absolutely look forward to it and then thank you for doing the interview we really appreciate it same here thanks for taking the time stem talk stem talk stem talk stem talk well of course i enjoy the discussions about anurag's research into the importance of maintaining muscle strength as we age i also found it interesting how so much of his work dovetails with the studies we are doing here in our health span resilience and performance research complex at iHMC yes Marcus it certainly does dovetail nicely and several of us at iH are really interested in uralith and a it has long been known that exercise activates metophagy and improves mitochondrial function but anurag has done a great job of demonstrating that uralith and a does this as well yes indeed exciting future in the field this is Marcus Baume and signing off for now and this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on stem talk thank you for listening to stem talk we want this podcast to be discovered by others so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review more information about this and other episodes can be founded our website stemtalk.us there you can also find more information about the guests we interview