 Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hello, I'm your host Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all of the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Today we have Dr. Rudy Tansy, who is best known for co-discovering all three familiar early onset Alzheimer's disease genes. In addition, Rudy's lab was the first to use human stem cells to create three-dimensional human brain organoids and three-dimensional neural galeal culture models of Alzheimer's disease, which became known as Alzheimer's in a dish. Better watch that dish. These models were the first to recapitulate all three key Alzheimer's disease pathological hallmarks and have made drugs screening faster and cheaper. Rudy is the director of the Genetics in Aging Research Unit, as well as the director of the Henry and Allison McCants Center for Brain Health. Rudy is also a co-director of the Massachusetts General Institute for Neural Degenerative Disease at Massachusetts General Hospital and serves as the Joseph P and Rose F. Kennedy Professor of Neurology at Harvard Medical School. Rudy has published more than 700 research papers and is one of the top 50 most-sided neuroscientists in the world. He is author of decoding darkness and co-author of two books with Deepak Chopra, Super Brain and the Healing Self. Before we get into our interview with Rudy, however, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the double-secret selection committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher and other podcast apps for the widest and most lavishly praise-filled reviews to read on Stem Talk. If you hear your review read on Stem Talk, just contact us at stemtalkatihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk T-shirt and then you will be the cool person. Today, our Weenie Review comes from a listener named Sean. It reads, Your podcasts led me down some great paths. The recent Feldman interview was tremendously informative as was the Jeff Volek interview and Keto in cancer. Of course, there is lots of work still left to do in terms of educating the general public. We are an unhealthy population. Your work is changing narratives and improving people's lives. What a great review, Sean and thanks to all our other Stem Talk listeners with help Stem Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now onto today's interview with Dr. Rudy Tancy. Stem Talk, Stem Talk, Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hello, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm your host Ken Ford. Rudy, welcome to Stem Talk. Thanks. Happy to be here. Very glad you're here as well. I understand that you were quite the curious child and started playing the accordion when you were just seven years old. Your dad, however, walked into the room one day and threw a Jimmy Smith album on your table and offered you some advice. So what did he say? Well, you know, I grew up in Rhode Island in a tiny community where, you know, you're a kid and you play accordion. I actually liked the accordion and my father was a jazz fan. So he gave me a Jimmy Smith, him and B3 Jazz organ album and he said, do you want to keep playing accordion? And I said, yeah, like it. And he said, okay, maybe we'll get you a monkey in a cup too. And then I listened to the album and I'm like, wow, this is the same type of organ that I hear and all the bands I was listening to back then. Like, you know, yes, and Santana and, you know, others. And I said, yeah, I think I want to play organ and so my father set me up with first portable organs and then by the time I was 15, I had a Hammond B3 and to this day on the side, I played that Hammond B3 professionally with rock bands like Iroh Smith and others in the studio, not not gigging this is studio. What kind of accordion were you studying? Oh, I don't remember that. The keyboard accordion or a button accordion? No, no, no. It was a keyboard accordion with buttons on the left. Right. He bought on the right and there was 120 bass, you know, extended. You know, I would love to get one again now. It's such a beautiful instrument. I like the the Cajun accordions, you know, the Daitonic accordions like they use there. I had one custom made, but I don't play it enough to be proficient. Oh, I would have no idea how to play that. You mentioned Jimmy Smith or I mentioned Jimmy Smith and he really, really helped to popularize as you know, the Hammond B3 and for our listeners, the Hammond B3 when paired up with a Leslie speaker is still a unique sound that hasn't really been replicated by synthesizers, at least to my taste. It just doesn't sound quite the same. No, I mean, I do have probably the best Hammond B3, facsimile in a synthesizer, which is the Nord NOID, but still not the same. But you know, any classic rock guitar player and I played with Vichy Blackmore from Deep Purple. I've done albums, three albums with Joe Perry from Aorus Smith. I did Aorus Smith album, two solo albums with Joe and others. And you know, rock guitarists love to have the Hammond B3 behind them. Yes. You listen to great guitarists like David Gilmore from Pink Floyd, a Mark Notha from Diastrates, the main keyboard you, the main thing you hear behind them is the Hammond B3. It's just a match made in Evan. Yes, it's a, it's a unique sound in my view. So Rudy, as a youth, you were also interested in science and medicine. And I heard perhaps from one of those proverbial little birdies that you participated back then and what was known as the Westine House Science Talent Search. I remember that. How was your experience with that? Well, I didn't win a prize. I got honorable, honorable mention, but it's weird because the project I picked and that I've been relevant to my research much later, I was speculating that in diabetic hypertensive retinopathy, patients who have diabetes with hypertension, that the reason why they had degeneration of the retina was that the iron in the blood was a reactive metal and causing oxidative damage in the eye. And I just speculated on this as a kid, I was 16, 17 years old. And it turns out that's probably true, but at the time, because it was just shameless speculation and my dad, I was just purely empirical based on case studies. It wasn't really hypothesis driven mechanism based science. You know, it didn't win a prize. But to this day, I still study reactive metals and oxidative stress in its role and inflammation and diseases like Alzheimer's, which is my main topic of study. That is interesting and prescient for one so young to hypothesize anything about that topic in my view. You mentioned you're from Rhode Island. I understand that you're from Cranston, Rhode Island. I am. You know, and I mean, you would never be able to do this today because of HIPAA and security was. And so, my parents started the first out service medical transcription company. And so they would have hospitals in Rhode Island and Massachusetts, including mass general, you know, send the recordings of the doctors and the cases and they would type them up. And my job as a kid was to photocopy those reports. And of course, I would read them. And it was actually reading through the reports that I got the idea for the Western House Science Talent Search. Today, I can show you when you're able to say you read those reports, but that was a long time ago. My wife is also from Cranston, Rhode Island. I think the opposite side of Cranston, she's Cranston West. Oh, there are rivals. Cranston East, Cranston East Thunderbolts versus Cranston West Falcon. Great rival. And I'm from East Cranage. So it's... Well, I went to school in East Cranage originally, actually. I went to Rocky Hill. Oh, yes. Rocky Day. I know Rocky Hill. Yeah, I went to Rocky Hill from 5th to 9th grade. And actually still stay in touch with them and support the school. That school, more than any other, really shaped my academic career. And then I went to public school, back to public school after Rocky Hill just as a... It was a long commute from my parents. It is. Yeah, Rocky Hill has shaped many lives in a positive direction. So after high school, how did you end up at the University of Rochester? What was the connection there that made that happen? Well, at the time, and this was 76, the idea of genetic engineering and recombinant DNA and gene splicing, terms we haven't even used anymore, like gene splicing and genetic engineering. We've just come into the fore. And Rochester had really the greatest concentration of pioneers in that area. Fred Sherman and Gary Wilson, Harry Taber, Frank Young, Ceyda Zane. And that's what I wanted to do. I had this romantic notion that I was going to be a geneticist doing this new genetics and gene splicing. And at that same time, there was a band on this type of research in Cambridge. Because when it first came out, I guess the folks who ran Cambridge thought that it might lead to Frankenstein. So at Harvard, there was a band for a while on this type of research. And it all worked out well because I got waitlisted at Harvard and decided, well, I was upset that I got waitlisted and I decided not to be on the waitlist. And I said, I'm going to University of Rochester. They have better genetics, you know, curriculum there anyway. That makes perfect sense. As I understand it, your grandfather had died when he was only 45 years old. And your father was only 17. And then your father died when he was 45 and you were 17. That's amazing. That kind of motivate you toward a study of genetics and that line of work. You know, the probably hereditary risk factors associated with heart disease was passed from one generation to the next. Was this one of your motivations? You know, I can't say it was. I was here to death and in my 20s I went, I was proactive and already went to go see my late 20s of cardiologist. And as soon as I could check out my own genetic risk factors I did. And I very proactively take care of my own cardiovascular health to offset the risk, you know, conferred through the generations from my grandfather to father. But no, it didn't. I mean, it's interesting. Even Alzheimer's, my grandmother got Alzheimer's disease after I decided to study Alzheimer's. So it wasn't, I was probably either. Yeah. Well, they both are fruitful things to study in so many ways. Earlier, you mentioned being sort of slightly annoyed with Harvard for weight listing you, but you ended up going to Harvard medical school for a PhD. How did you decide to forgive them and how is this all worked out? Well, I mean, I said, so what really happened was I, I don't know if we're going to talk about the work I did with Tim Gasella on Huntington defining the. We will indeed. Yeah, but it's always after that work. I was actually going to go to Yale for human genetics and I applied to Yale and Yale and I got in and I was going to go there and then some folks who like Joe Martin who was a chair of our department at Mass General and Jim Gasella who is my mentor said, you already, you know, you know that you know lots of the newest human genetics already. In fact, we had the chair of Yale human genetics come to learn from us and you trained, you taught them this, this new human genetic stuff that we're doing. Why don't you apply genetics as something else and they convinced me to wait a year and instead apply for neuroscience programs and Harvard had one of the best neuroscience programs. It was weird because back then, you know, it wasn't like a system like we do now. I only applied to Yale when I wanted to go to human genetics and then when I decided to delay a year, I only applied to Harvard for the neuroscience program. You know, now it is you apply to 50 different things and make sure that your backups back then it was just like, okay, I'm going to go to Yale. I think it was a little simpler back then indeed. So yeah, so that was so I really, you know, wanted and I'm pretty sure when I worked with Jim Gasella that I coined the term neurogenetics because I can't find any reference to being used before I named Jim Gasella's lab at Mass General, the neurogenetics lab. Mainly so that we would get our deliveries delivered to us and not to the general genetics department at Mass General Hospital. And so I may have actually invented the word neurogenetics and I call myself a neurogenesis today. Well, it's a pithy term and speaking of Jim Gasella, this is a perfect segue. As I understand it, this was 1983 or above then and you're around 20 years old at Mass General working with him. And you were part of a group of researchers that were the first ones to discover a specific disease gene family studies at the time and showed the Huntington's disease gene was linked to a polymorphic DNA marker that maps to human chromosome for this is really interesting. Well, if you move back, it was actually 1980. Oh, even earlier. 1980 I was playing in a band to make side money and I was playing at a club near Mass General and we stayed at that hotel overnight and I said, what am I doing? I need to get serious about my life. Just can't just have fun playing with a band and I went to Mass General to look for the job board, you know, human resources closed and there was this job, you know, including the common DNA and Southern Blots and you know all the stuff that not like a handful of people in the world know how to do is very customized genetic engineering protocols, you know, transferring DNA by Southern Blots and purifying restriction enzymes to cut DNA to find DNA variants of polymorphisms. So, 10 out of Jim Gassel, who at the time was 25, I was 20 was look, he was finishing his PhD at MIT with David Hausman and he had figured out how to find single copy pieces of DNA that could be markers in the genome and the idea was to use those to find a disease gene, which is mundane now, but it had never been done. And he was looking for a postdoc to set up his lab and I somehow convinced him to hire me and he hired me on my birthday, which was September 18th, couple of days ago, he was having my birthday and now my birthday. I got that job and I was so excited and then you know, we in our book called decoding darkness in the first chapter of it's many about Alzheimer's with the first chapter is how you couldn't buy anything back then to do human genetics research. You had to Jerry with everything. I mean, I we would go to Walmart or came out and just pick out house household stuff and Jerry with it to do everything we had to do it. There were glorious times. It had to be MacGyver, you know, and just figure out how to get DNA transfer it and from gels and we it was we found the first dozen DNA variants ever in the human genome, picked them out randomly, not a 70 million of them know. And we got extremely lucky and that we pulled out 23 pieces of I mean 12 pieces of hay from 23 hay stacks and we found the needle needle being the variant that co segregated with Huntington's disease. We found the Huntington's gene in miraculous time against all odds and Jim became known as lucky Jim for that. And that really that single study published in nature, first time a disease gene was found using genetics really then stimulated the entire human genome project and the excitement. That we could use genetics to figure out diseases that were otherwise completely mysterious and I that for that reason I nominate Jim Gasella every year. The Nobel Prize Committee asked me to nominate someone and I nominate every year Jim Gasella and I hope for one day. You'll see that he's the guy who really stimulated the genetics revolution and human genetics and I was just happy to be the hands and be a part of it. That's a great story and thank you for sharing it. Let's move forward now to 19a 7 when you discovered the first Alzheimer's gene you named it emaloid precursor protein or a pp because it essentially makes emaloid and the mutations in that gene cause a rare form of early onset Alzheimer's with near certainty by making too much emaloid in the brain as I understand it. So now we know that emaloid is something that can occur in the brain a decade or two perhaps before symptoms. Can you tell us about the paper that came out in science that detailed this discovery. So going back to when I was going to go to Yale for genetics in advance of that I was already prepping to do by genetics thesis that Yale which I then instead did it Harvard but now it had to be more neuroscience based. I was in the neuroscience program that was a year later so I decided that I was going to use genetic variance on chromosome 21 I was going to build the first end to end genetic linkage map of a human chromosome and I picked chromosome 21 because it's the smallest and I would get done the fastest and then of course chromosome 21 is present in three copies rather than a normal two copies in down syndrome subjects and when I read in science magazine news and views article by Jean marks. It said down syndrome subjects or patients inevitably get amulet plaques and Alzheimer's pathology my middle age I speculated there would be an Alzheimer's gene there is no Alzheimer's gene known yet there would be a chromosome 21 and since the down syndrome patients got amulet first I speculated there be a gene on chromosome 21. It was going to make the amyloid and it was going to cause Alzheimer's and when I brought that to the department heads Harvard in the neuro biology department and I said I want to do this for my thesis they said that is just shameless speculation upon shameless speculation your student you're going to be safer than that that's way too high risk no and you know I was you know a stubborn kid who played in a rock band and I said no I'm going to do it and I found a down syndrome lab at children's hospital which I'm going to do it. Children's hospital with David current to late David current and he allowed me to do that in his lab so here I am ironically I isolate the first it turned out to be right the gene was on 21 that made amyloid I named it amyloid precursor protein to this day now amyloid is now agreed upon to be the cause of the disease there was a first Alzheimer's gene but ironically the first Alzheimer's disease gene was isolated at children's hospital and Boston because it only to down syndrome. Another really interesting story it illustrates how one couldn't have really planned for that sequence you know you seem to have taken advantage of in a good way of the opportunities that I presented you and it is it's a path that one couldn't map out beforehand. Yeah I think my mantra in science from the very beginning was and regarding the word research some folks emphasize the word re meaning go back to what's already been done and replicate it and incrementally advance it I've always been much more ambitious about emphasizing a word search and wanted to do something new out of the box not being afraid to take risks and you know within reason you have to have a career we can't totally create this stuff but you know but that's been basically the study of the research. The story of my entire career is high risk high reward projects including my very first you know the project and different my doctor thesis and Harvard which is to find that first I was. Yes that does sound like a risky thesis project and I'm very happy for you that it worked out well in your book decoding darkness you write the few real nightmares on earth compared to the terror wrought by Alzheimer's disease that's certainly true many of us have seen it in. Our own families are relatives can you give people a sense of the book I mean it has the title is also a really appropriate title I think you tell us a little bit about your book. Yeah well decoding darkness was my first book and the three books I wrote after that were all New York Times best sellers decoding darkness did not sell that great because you know it was it was a little bit more scientific but it was my favorite book and it was meant to tell the story about how we found the Alzheimer's disease. And the real stories the politics the so proper is the serendipity the mistakes that turned into discoveries you know it's meant to show that discoveries never a straight line and I hate when people apply revisionist history be a neat story and instead of telling the real story of how you got to the truth through a jagged zigzag line full of mistakes that they try to just then you know homogenize it and and sterile. And sterilize it and make it look like everything just worked out just right here was hypothesis and then this work and I said you know I'm going to write this book and I'm going to interview everybody friends and not so friends of mine in the field take all have this say to say how did how did we really find these disease genes these Alzheimer's genes and some much better story that way and you know they're embarrassment and there are mistakes and there was deep dark side of the soul involved but you know I think especially young butting scientists need to know. It's okay to make mistakes and as long as you learn from them don't obsess on them and move forward. That's a great message we have a large audience of young scientists postdocs and PhD and MD students listen to the podcast and that's one of the reasons we talk about people's life course because it's never a straight line and there's a lot of serendipity involved and I'm glad you talked about that and your book sounds wonderful. As people age we become more prone to memory lapses I mean I think everyone is aware of that I've heard you say I believe that memory loss as well as some diminishing of our general cognitive abilities sort of inevitably comes along as we age in the same sense as a 65 year old or in my case a 69 year old can't play basketball anymore with young people perhaps college students it just wouldn't work out for me. But when people start to have memory lapses they typically nervously sort of obsess about whether they've got the Alzheimer's gene or whether Alzheimer's is in their future based on how long a person lives however only 5% of Alzheimer's genes guarantee the disease 95% predisposed the person to Alzheimer's which means that lifestyle must have an awful lot to do with avoiding the disease or kicking it down the road ways can you tell us more about this. Yeah so the three early on set Alzheimer's disease genes all of which are involved with discovering the first one was the Emily because approach an APP and then please know one and please know and to those two ladder genes are the make the enzyme to cut the APP to create the amyloid so you have to substrate and the enzymes and those mutations unfortunately guarantee Alzheimer's disease by 60 years old often under 50 years old but they're rare there may be 2% of cases and then you have an Alzheimer's gene. The first one is the APP which is the most common late on set risk factor and about 2% of the population have 2 copies of APP for which dramatically increases risk by about 14 fold but doesn't guarantee the disease it does seem to guarantee that you'll get the pathology in the brain in a normal lifespan but once you get the amyloid pathology and onto the tangles and the inflammation you know it can take a decade or three before you get symptoms so I like to think of APP for homozygates. Double copy is pretty much a guarantee for the pathology but it comes later in life so that you may pass away of other causes before it transforms into clinical symptoms of the disease so that's that 5% number that where you have the guaranteed pathology and then if you live long enough guarantee disease but in the vast majority of the new Alzheimer's genes including the ones we have found since then and there are now almost a hundred of them all control neuro inflammation inflammation is the big one. The biggest killer of neurons and synapses in the brain and as we age inflammation becomes more and more rampant throughout the body so I played basketball I played soccer and cause I played basketball while I was a scientist I played for 30 years 5 hours a week full court ball right up until the pandemic and you know my knees got shot from that and I'm getting a knee replacement 5 days from now I'm going to get my right knee total knee replacement. 5 days from this interview not looking forward to that but what I'm saying is that inflammation not only hits the body and our knees and get in his rear and tear there but it hits the brain your lifestyle your mind asleep you get quality of your diet are you exercising all these things affect the rate of neuro inflammation in your brain and you know everybody a lot of people experience brain fog as we call it recovered that is neuro inflammation and so you can get a sense of how you're going to get a sense of how intense inflammation can cause brain fog or confusion you know even if it's temporary but this happens at a chronic and sub clinical level and most people and then they suddenly don't have the band but to remember everything and you know they get stressed out because they can't be like Google and remember every single name and frankly you know in past generations people didn't expect to memorize everything but now because we have social media and we're constantly on Google and out AI tools that can tell us everything we need to know we expect to be the same thing we expect to be Mr. Google and AI but we put so much pressure on ourselves to to maintain and retain and recall so much information we stress ourselves out that causes more inflammation in the brain so you know there's a difference between that and and actually on set of all sizes is what I want to say. That makes sense and you know you and others have been quoted as saying that people age prematurely when they stop learning new things and just in everyday life we sort of see that you know some folks when they retire for example don't take up challenging new activities they sort of just don't and they do seem to age very quickly and I've heard you argue that the harder something is to learn the better it is for your aging brain something challenging we've had other guests some time ago. There's an humans on yes or four and T узzi. Before the snow in the sky some time ago they were a lot of challenges and then you rise your but what are we doing now it may be screws to push everything together you dance you know in a more serious way, what determines the degree of dementia once Alzheimer's disease begins? The answer is the same. It's the loss of synapses. So here you are with 100 billion neurons and trillions of synapses, maybe tens of trillions, and inflammation and acute attacks on the brain through the aging and how you're living your life, including genetics, you know, 60 different Alzheimer's genes that determine your threshold for neuroinflammation. Well, neuroinflammation removes synapses. So inevitably as you age, synapses get lost. So it's our job to, it's kind of like money coming out of your bank account. If you have too much money coming out of your bank account, what do you do? You make money and save money. The comparison for that in the brain is, you need to make more synapses so that you have synaptic reserve, like visoros in the bank, visoros in the brain, because the more synapses you make, the more you can lose before you get into trouble. So the way you build up synapses in the brain is very simple. You learn new things, the more things you try to learn. And it doesn't always have to be something like intense, like a new language or a new musical instrument, could be a new hobby. It could be watching documentaries or reading nonfiction books and learning new things. As long as you're learning something new, you're making new synapses. And all learning is based on association with what you already know. So when you make new synapses, as you learn new things, they connect with existing synapses because the new information is being associated with the older information that's already in synapses, it's already integrated your neural network. So not only reinforcing your neural network and the synapses you have, you're building new ones and creating new pathies around that. And those pathways create resilience. So when we talk about resilience as we age, there's two forms of resilience. Resilience, one is that despite aging and the onset of pathology, you remain cognitively intact. That could be because you have a good diet to limit inflammation, but it could also be that despite the inflammation, you've made so many new synapses by learning new things that you can afford to lose more than most people before you get into trouble. That's a great way of describing it, I think. You know, we've been talking now about some of the genetic basis for Alzheimer's. And when you first started looking into Alzheimer's in the 1980s, not much was known. And it seems like we've come a long ways in many ways. And yet there are many mysteries still remaining regarding Alzheimer's. I wondered if you could give us just a quick squirt about what you see as the principal advances. And as I said, we've discussed some of them, the genetic basis for Alzheimer's. And could you tell us what you see as the biggest mysteries regarding Alzheimer's? You know, there must be some fascinating questions that you want to ask and resolve in the next few years. To be really honest, a lot of the mystery has been solved. The media still tends to want to create controversy and debate because that's what sells papers and gets you clickbait on the internet. But it's now pretty clear. And this is what genetics taught us. The first gene said, amyoid plaques, the amyoid deposition, beta amyoid, disticky material causes a disease. And then we had two decades of confusion and debate because when we put those early onset Alzheimer's genes that we and others discovered, the APP, the presinoids, who put those mutations at the mice, they would make amyoid. And eventually there'd be enough neuroinflammation to get the synapse loss and it'd have cognitive issues. But the mice did not make the other key feature of Alzheimer's disease, the neurofibulary tangles, these tristid filaments of the tauprotein that accumulate inside of neurons and kill them from within. So people said, how can amyoid cause the disease? All eugeneticists who say amyoid causes the disease, how can it be if the mice don't get tangles? Fast forwarding, guess what? We now know, mice cannot make tangles. They have the wrong forms of the tauprotein. So a lot of, much to do about nothing. But it did lead to massive debates about whether it's plaques or tangles. Mice just, now we know that mice don't have the right forms of the tauprotein to make the tangles. And so the big breakthrough came in 2014 when we created Alzheimer's in a dish. We created a 3D human neurocell culture where we're growing human neurons in a gel-like matrix that mimic the brain. We put in the mutation. So now they're human neurons making amyoid in a gel-like matrix that mimic the brain, ensuring us in that system in four weeks you got amyoid plaques, weight another week or two and you got the tangles, block the plaques and the amyoid, then you don't get the tangles. So that was the first proof of concept physically that said amyoid does cross tangles. If you finally do it in a human system in that first human 3D cultural model of Alzheimer's disease, we published that in nature in 2014. And that kind of rested the debate. But then there was a new controversy. People said, okay, amyloic in cross tangles and yes, the genetics say that amyoid causes this disease. But wait a minute, we had all these clinical trials and patients and we lowered the amyloid but they didn't get better. And that caused more controversy in debate, especially in the newspapers. Oh, they're wasting a tax dollars chasing amyloid. No, here's the fact. Amyloid is to Alzheimer's disease as cholesterol is to heart disease. Just like Brown and Goldstein won a Nobel Prize for studying an early onset family with heart disease with a rear mutation that was fully penetrant, guaranteed the disease and that mutation was in the LDL receptor and increased cholesterol. Did that mean that oh, if a patient has congestive heart failure and needs a bypass, all we have to do is lower their cholesterol? No. The early onset fully penetrant mutations and genetics teach you what to prevent, not what to treat. Those mutations we first discovered in the 80s and 90s and the early onset gene said amyloid comes early. It takes then a one, two or three decades for that cascade to finish before you have enough neural inflammation to cause enough cell death and synapse loss to get the disease. By that time, simply hitting the amyloid is a decade or two or three too late. So I like to say that genetics taught us that amyloid is a match that lights the brush buyers of tangles that spread and propagate. What can strike the match? Genetics, infection, air pollution, all kinds of things. Once you have the brush buyers of tangles, not until they triggered the large forest fires of neural inflammation, do finally have enough cell that synapse loss to get this disease. So it's not no surprise that the majority of late onset Alzheimer's disease susceptibility genes that increase your risk but don't guarantee the disease control neural inflammation and the brain. And it was my lab that discovered the first Alzheimer's neural inflammation gene as well back in 2008. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, locomotion, health span, resilience, and performance. So, I think that's a great way to make sure that you're able to make sure that you're able to help span, resilience, and performance. I remember the 2014 paper when that came out in nature, I think it was. And you mentioned it earlier, that had a huge splash. I remember people that weren't even working in the field, you know, having anything to do with Alzheimer's, were sharing the paper. And I know that you received a lot of attention for that paper. There was a write up in time about it. You know, it time puts out this list of 100 most influential people. And Ria Shriver wrote a really very nice little blurb about your work. I thought it was very nicely done. Yeah, it was kind of fun to get on that. Most fun about getting on the time 100 list was going to the time 100 Gala. And, you know, getting to meet the other people on the list that year. And Chris Frenoland, my favorite movie maker, was on the list. And I just, you know, kind of pigeonhole them at the bar. And was talking about Insta Stellar and all his movies, probably to the point that he got to look tired. But that was a lot of fun. And, you know, to think about the Alzheimer's in addition to this culture model, it did two things. It basically validated the amyloid hypothesis that says, yes, amyloid does cause the tangles. And then that causes the cell death and the combination of the amyloid and cell that triggers the neuroinflammation, starting with the microglial cells and then you get the disease. And the first microglial Alzheimer's gene was CD33, which we found back in08. And in fact, even in08, when we found that, it was the first full genome-wide association screen of Alzheimer's family, we had conducted, because we had gotten funding to do that from a very forward thinking foundation. Cur Alzheimer's Fund, who also funded, Cur Alzheimer's Fund and Boston also funded the 3D Alzheimer's and a dish model. So, you know, everything started coming together about the course of this disease. And that's why I like to say it is not a lot of mystery left because we know the disease begins one to three decades before symptoms. Amyloid deposits, which could be a result of genetics where you make more amyloid or you don't clear it as well. And that amyloid over time causes tangles. And those tangles spread. Once you have a tangles, like the pre-ons, they spread and propagate. And if that's all that happens, you won't get the disease. We know that because we have, once in a while, a resilient brain, a post-mortem brain of someone in their 80s who died with no cognitive issues, but to the amazement of the pathologist is full of plaques and tangles. And you say, whoa, this is Alzheimer's. No, they were fine. And then the answer is always the same about why they didn't have Alzheimer's disease symptoms, no neuroinflammation. It is possible to have teens that protect you against neuroinflammation. So in terms of the mystery, the mystery now is, how do we get the right drugs and treatments into people at the right time to end this disease, to nib it in the bud? And I have to tell you, this is the most exciting time in Alzheimer's ever because now we finally have a clear path for those who are reading the literature and not reading the newspapers and getting stuck on clickbait. It's very clear that amyloid causes this disease that tangles propagate the death, to neuroinflammation must then cause the massive cell deaths that leads to dementia. If you want to stop this disease, then stop amyloid. The faster you make amyloid in your brain, the sooner you get Alzheimer's disease. That's clear now. And so for younger people, let's stop the amyloid early, detect it early and safely and affordably stop it early. For those who already suffer with the disease, let's try to put out that fire and help them as much as we can. Let's try to crawl the neuroinflammation and stop the re-emcaging of death and synapses loss into brains. That's the path forward. So I think a lot of the mystery is actually gone at this point. And you know, when I just turned 66 two days ago, and people say, a lot of my friends are retired to say, you're gonna retire, I'm like, are you kidding? Like every experiment I've done in my life since 1982, and Alzheimer's has led to this moment. This is the most exciting time. I'm more excited now than I was a grad student isolating the MLA gene, right? Because now there's finally a chance to finish the story in the next few years. And that's what I'm gonna do. That's what we're like colleagues, that's what we're gonna do in my life. Well, everybody is pulling for you in that regard, but a dreadful disease really does need to be ended. In 2019, you had another interesting and important paper that investigated the cross-talk between Michael Goliol receptor CD33 and Trem 2. These two genes have been associated, as you mentioned, one of them earlier with the risk of Alzheimer's disease. And I've heard you refer to these genes, or I think I read it in the paper as Ianian Yang. Can you talk about why that is? What do you mean by these two genes are Ianian and tell us about the significance of this study? Yeah, I mentioned that back in 2008, when we carried out the first full genome via an association screen and Alzheimer's families, the main gene that came out was this gene CD33. And time magazine called that discovery one of the top 10 medical breakthroughs of the year. And we were laughing because we had no idea if the gene does. So new Alzheimer's disease, we didn't know what it did. And then a very talented scientist in my group, Anna Greciu, had a paper in 2013 in Neuron first, where she showed that CD33 is the switch on Michael Goliol cells to tell them instead of being nice housekeepers, clearing the amyloid, taking up the amyloid and eating it and clearing it. And by the way, that's what the new Alzheimer drugs that we just approved do, the KEMB and the Kasson lab, their immunotherapies that triggered the Michael Goliol cells to eat the amyloid. With CD33, as it turns out, we found out in 2013, tells the Michael Goliol cells, you don't have to eat amyloid and clean anymore, just spit out proflamatory cytokines and cause neuroinflammation. So it switches the Michael Goliol cells from helpful housekeepers to killers. And later, five years later, the Trem 2 gene was found as the second Michael Goliol Alzheimer gene at decro genetics. And Trem 2 is the opposite, right? And Anna published in 2019, this paper you just referred to, that they in and in, Trem 2 tells the Michael Goliol cells keeping in the amyloid, keep common carry on, don't cause neuroinflammation. CD33 does the opposite. And we looked at the crosstalk between these two. And the reason why there are many other receptors and an intracellular proteins that are part of this pathway, where you constantly have these Michael Goliol cells in the spectrum between housekeeper and killer, clearing amyloid or inducing neuroinflammation. Why? Because Michael Goliol cells are the main defenders of the brain, did a first defense. While they're cleaning up the amyloid and they're eating the amyloid, because the Trem 2 is telling them to do that. The CD33 is creyessen. As they're eating, if they eat dead neurons, let's say a few neurons die with tangles, cause of the amyloid inducing the tangles, and they eat some dead neurons. That's a signal to them that there may be an infection. That doesn't have to be an infection. They were programmed by evolution to assume there's an infection if they're eating dead neurons. These signals are called damps, right? So there's two ways to get a Michael Goliol cell to become a killer. They eat an ash or a microbe, like a bacteria or virus that's infectious. That's a pamp. Or they eat a dead neuron where they assume that that neuron died with infection. Either way, instead of housekeeping, they bring in their ramifications, that are cleaning up the debris and amyloid. They become a me-boy, and they shoot out throw-of-flammatory cytokines like a death star, and they tell them astrocytes to get involved, and they cause widespread neuroinflammation. Why? To wipe out that part of the brain, so the infection, the perceived infection, which doesn't spread. And so today, these Michael Goliol cells didn't get the memo. They're realist, 80 or 90 years old, that we do get plaques and tangles as we get older, and they cause some cell deaths, but when they sense that cell death, they assume it's an infection, just like they did a hundred thousand years ago, and say, wipe out just part of the brain. And it's that process that causes 10 times more cell death than synapse loss, than the original plaques and tangles, and now you finally start to fall into the symptoms of cognitive impairment and dementia. That's very interesting, and you describe it very well. Last year, you had a paper in neuron that the press, in your words, sort of made a hash of or a mess of physical exercise has been shown to reduce amyloid beta in various Alzheimer's disease models, but is imperfectly associated with amyloid burdening humans. And the underlying mechanisms that account for this really have not been lucidated as far as I know, irisin is an exercise induced hormone, quite an interesting one actually. In this paper, you revealed for the first time a cellular amylochicular mechanism by which exercise induced irisin attenuates amyloid beta pathology. I'm sure everyone wants to hear about this paper where a lot of our listeners are avid exercisers. And so if you could tell us about the paper and its findings, and how was it reported in a way that caused a lot of confusion and sort of made a mess of the description of your findings? And how much of this is relevant to humans in your view? Well, the backdrop for that paper in neuron, which was the first author of that paper, well, the main author of that paper was Seihun Choi, who was also the first author of the nature paper under the first Alzheimer's disease model as well. He was also the first author and science paper we had in 2018 on how exercise induces neurogenesis, the birth of new neurons in the brain and how that emiguates cognition and Alzheimer's mice. So the backdrop for this study was that you speak them in, my colleague, Adana Fobba, first discovered this protein, this little peptide called irisin, named after the Greek god or goddess iris, in its secreted by muscles when you exercise. And then there was another paper in cell by my close colleague, Sam Cecodia, in 2005, that said, if you give mice running wheels, Alzheimer's disease, transgenic mice, you give them running wheels, and they exercise, the amyloid is dramatically removed. And so the new paper in neuron basically put it all together. What we showed is that irisin when it's produced by muscles as your exercise enters into the blood is actively transported into the brain. We showed it binds a receptor on astrocytes. And when that happens, the astrocytes are less likely to become reactive. In other words, even if the microglial cells are upset and telling the astrocytes to become reactive and neuroinflammatory, they stay chilled out. And the astrocytes instead spit out an enzyme called neprolycem that enzymatically degrades the amyloid. So there's all these different ways the brain has evolved to make sure you don't have too much amyloid in the brain. You want some amyloid beta protein, it plays a role in the brain, but you don't want too much of the amyloid in the brain because that's going to trigger the tangles and the Alzheimer's cascade. So the brain can export the amyloid beta protein out actively through the crust of blood brain barrier. It can get the microglial cells to eat it, which happens with the right diet and with the sleep. They could also get the astrocytes, especially during sleep or exercise, to enzymatically break down the amyloid, where I said the press then took this and said, okay, then Alzheimer patients just exercise and they'll get better. Well, again, exercise is great. It's a great idea for Alzheimer patients and inducing the new neuron sub-birth and neurogenesis will be helpful. But at that point, clearly, an amyloid is still a little too late. That's something you want to do much earlier in the disease. So we had to kind of set that straight. I can see how that would cause the confusion. I mean, I can imagine the interpretation, anyone who works in science, irrespective of the part of science, but particularly in your part, you know, you deal with this throughout your career with sometimes well-intentioned media, misrepresenting the situation in a way that leads to confusion and people taking actions that are probably not helpful. You're writing a new book, and I think you're doing this one on your own. You've done some marvelous books earlier with Deepak Chopra, and that's an interesting topic itself. How did you ever meet him, by the way? Oh, so back in 2010, I was invited to give the... It was the first time I gave a public lecture of this type, and I was invited to give a talk at Ted Med, which was to Ted for medical stuff, and the session was on aging. And I talked about the biology of aging in my talk, Deepak Chopra talked about aging and spirituality. Quincy Jones, the musician, talked about being an aging musician and staying active in Frank Gary, just famous architect, talked about aging and staying active as an architect. It was a really cool session. And literally, this is embarrassing, but later on, I was in the hotel Del Coro, and I was in the bathroom, and Deepak Chopra was, you know, and the other stall there in the urinal, to be honest, and you look so over to me, and he says, I really enjoyed your talk. So tell me is the brain a noun or a verb? And I said, well, it's a verb, but I would really rather talk outside. Um, so when we started talking, we had this... I always had this idea to write a book on neuroplasticity and the amazing ability to brain to regenerate even after a stroke. And so, yes, we wrote this book, the first book we wrote together was super brain, and the book did extremely well. It sold out, I don't know. I think it's everybody in copies now, and then that led us to do two more books together. It was also bestsellers, but, you know, the last book we published, it was a trilogy, the last book we published in 2018 was The Healing Self about the amazing powers of the immune system to both protect you, but also how inflammation could hurt you. And in the last part of that book, we talked about a lifestyle plan to limit the amount of inflammation in your body and brain. And I had... So this is kind of crazy, because the same time that book came out, I had an album, a record album, come out with Joe Perry, various other artists, Ringo Stars, Sun, Zack Starky, and we recorded it at Johnny Depp's house at a studio. And the book and the album came out the same day, and I had to do things for both of them, and I had to give a book talk on The Healing Self, and I said, how can I... I was literally in the shower, and I said, how could I summarize this action plan for reducing inflammation in the brain? And as I thought about it, I came up with the acronym SHIELD, which is sleep, H-handling stress, I, Interactual and others, E, exercise, L, learn new things, D, diet. And I put it on Twitter and it went viral, and now there's been, I don't know, tens of millions of views and various videos, not just for me, but for others and SHIELD kind of became a thing of its own. So finally, I decided to write my own new book on SHIELD, but we call Brain SHIELD, that will go into this stuff. But it emanated from just the basic pillars of health around getting enough sleep, it's during sleep that you clear amyloids from the brain, handling stress, chronic stress causes inflammation, staying interactive with others, that stimulation that you need for the brain, lonely this increases risk for Alzheimer's. Exercise, we talked about the benefits of exercise, learning new things, we talked about having to make new synapses, and diet we haven't spoken about, but diet, I think the main thing to remember is what's good for the gut is good for the brain. Sam's authority and I and others, Dave Holtz, we've published numerous papers now showing that if you positively affect the gut microbiome of Alzheimer's mice, that again, you get those microglial cells to clear more amyloid, and that's the name of the game for reducing risk. So you can use your, if you keep your gut microbiome happy, with a plant-based diet and a lot of fiber, somehow that triggers in the brain, the microglial cells to clear more amyloid and be less inflammatory. And I'll just finally say that Dean Ornish, who's very famous for his cardio diet, he and I published a paper about a month ago on a lifestyle intervention trial for Alzheimer's that was based on shield, and it was a small trial only 50 patients, 20 weeks, but we got incredibly positive results for a small trial that says we need to keep going. And this was a plant-based diet, vegan diet. I sent, we sent them a device I invented that helps them to meditate, that uses light flashing and music that I produced. We had them be interactive, we had them direct to size, we monitor their sleep, and we got, kind of, he's also too good to be true in terms of cognition and amyloid biomarkers, and so we're gonna do a bigger study now based on that. So I think shield has his legs, and we're gonna do more in terms of clinical trials, but also I wanna write this book and get the information out there. In terms of your own thinking, how do you bring together, we've talked about a lot of different aspects of Alzheimer's disease, how do you bring it together in a sort of a comprehensive model in your thought process? We've talked about some lengths, the benefit of anti-amyloid therapies applied early on. You thought that could be quite beneficial and we're all hopeful that that's the case. And you also acknowledge that the accumulation of amyloid is not necessarily pathological or at least not directly leading to symptoms in all cases. And it sort of, the amyloid burden, as you mentioned earlier, doesn't completely predict cognitive function and cognitive decline. And many of the components to shield, such as learning and cognitive stimulation, have been suggested to have little or no effect on amyloid. So you've painted a really good picture here and I'm wondering if there's a way to pull it all together in your view or is this a work for the future? Or am I missing the thread that pulls it all together? Well, the only missing thread is, if you have amyloid in your brain, it would trigger the tangles and a neuronal cell death. And you could be an extremely rare person where that does not trigger neuronflammation. The microgliocell stay chilled out and you don't get the symptoms of Alzheimer's. But the vast majority of people, if you have amyloid, it's gonna trigger tangles and eventually that process is gonna trigger neuronflammation and eventually there'll be enough cell death in synapses to get the disease. So once you have amyloid in tangles, it's a matter of what you live long enough to get the disease. It's not a matter of whether it's when. So if you were lucky enough to not get amyloid and tangles in your brain until you're quite old and you're gonna die of other causes, then if you did live, if lifespan was average of 120 or 130, unfortunately, I think most people would have enough amyloid and tangles and inflammation with very few exceptions to get this disease. It's part of aging. And yearly onset, Alzheimer's genius, the first ones you discovered, get your dysdyssegion in your 40s and 50s in some cases in your 20s. Down syndrome subjects get it middle age. If you carry two APOE 4 variants, you have higher risk for the disease in your 60s. So it's a continual. So I think that what this says is that the path ahead is twofold. We need to carry out early prediction of who's at risk based on genetics and family history. Based on that, we need to know when to carry out early detection. Let's see if you're starting to make amyloid plaques in your brain. For some people, you need to start looking when they're 20 or 30 or 40s. Others you don't need to look to live 50 or 60, depending on genetics and your family history. Now, once you know that you have to do something about that amyloid that's starting to accumulate, or even before it accumulates, your genetics says, you're guaranteed to get Alzheimer's amyloid. Let's hit it now. We're going to need early intervention. We'll need drugs that are safe and affordable. So in a democratized manner, we can provide protection to everyone. Now, the shield, in the meantime, shield is aimed at both clearing amyloid and stopping inflammation. The shield lifestyle plan. And the lifestyle intervention trial we did shows that it has legs. But in terms of drugs, the only two approved drugs out there for clearing amyloid are immunotherapies that are very expensive and they're not particularly safe, but they at least provide a proof of concept that removing amyloid, if you do it early enough, is good for Alzheimer patients. Now, if you ask how many people in America today should they have the now available blood test that tells them they have amyloid in a brain? Yes, there is a blood test that mirrors pet scans and brain imaging to tell you if you have amyloid in your brain. How many people with that blood test would find out they have amyloid in their brain? And at high risk for Alzheimer's disease, one or two, maybe three decades from now, that number is 50 million people, 50 million people in this country don't have Alzheimer's disease, clinical symptoms would already have the pathology in the brain brewing. We need to provide them with interventions that are safe and affordable to nip that into butt, to bring that amyloid back down, to stop the tangles from spreading, to crawl the neuroinflammation. So this is what my lab focuses on now. I have a novel drug I've been developing for 20 years that lowers the amyloid production, we'll be going into phase one trials next year, it took 20 years and about $25 million of NIH funding and funding from foundations, like the Cure Alzheimer's funding get there. But the other thing we've done, and this came from work I did with a company, co-founded as co-founding SAP head. Amelix, Amelix came up with a repurposed drug, a two drugs repurposed together for ALS that was approved a few years ago, COVID-19, now the phase three fail, so the drug was withdrawn, but it did help a lot of people and the company's still giving it to about 1,000 ALF patients who benefited from it and they're getting it for free. But anyway, that company provided the proof of concept, you could screen known drugs that are already safe and create combinations of them that are multimodal and synergistic to hit different pathologies at once and create new drugs from existing repurposed drugs. And I've been doing this now for seven years, using the ALSIM as an adish model over the last seven years and about $5 million of funding from Cure Alzheimer's fund. We've screened every known drug, we've screened over 2,000, 3,000 natural products and we have a list of which ones stop the placks, which ones prevent the tangles, down stream of the placks and which ones grow the neuroinflammation and which ones get those microglial cells to eat more amyloid. And we're using combinations of those now in clinical trials, quick go-no-go trials and ALSIM patients to say, is this combination doing in a patient what it did in the dish by tracking their pathology when they're on the drugs based on blood-based biomarkers? We have blood tests that can tell you are we reducing amyloid, are we reducing tangles and inflammation? And you can use those biomarkers to simply ask in a short six month trial at these drugs getting into the brain and doing in patients what we saw in the dish based on blood-based biomarkers. So that's the bulk of my work right now is to find these repurposed drugs and natural products because the pathway to patients is two thirds shorter if you have known drugs that are already safe versus trying to do a new drug that has to be proven safe. So I have one new drug that is basically the last man standing in the world for a drug that can turn off the tap. Remember all these other drugs we hear about are clearing the amyloid after its thirst, like a sink full of water, the brain full of amyloid, the existing drugs, a rot of rooter, right? They clear the amyloid, but the amyloid's already there in the order to cross problems. I'm developing a drug that turns off the tap early on and that drug we hope someday will be to statin the same way you take a statin to hit cholesterol as a prevent heart disease. This would be to statin equivalent to hit amyloid to prevent Alzheimer's. So that's why I'm more excited than ever about our work. Yeah, I can see that. Have you discovered any particularly promising existing FDA approved drugs or nutraceuticals that seem to be beneficial given the large screen you told us about? Yes, over 300 of them. Between natural products and approved drugs, we have over 100 in each category. One's to drive the microglio cells to clearing amyloid, one's to prevent the amyloid from inducing the tangles and spread, and one's to simply chill out the microglio cells from becoming neuroinflammatory and we're choosing from those combinations. So when I talked to the NIH, we funded the novel drug we came up with, it's called a Gamma secretace modulator where we learned how to make that drug based on the presenoline gene so we discovered in 1995. It took that long to get there. They said, you know, it's a new drug. We would rather you don't, as an academic, respond to the IND in other words, apply for the clinical trial. So they said, either license it to a company or start a company. So I started a new company, a new recommendation back in November of 2022 called Active Pharmaceuticals on the scientific founder for disclosure, I have equity in the company. Difficult to name it like I should say, I have equity in that company is two. And that company's developing the new drug, but right now we took the six or seven best repurposed, you know, known drugs and you would never predicted these. Believe me, you would never said, oh, I bet you it's this drug or that. This is agnostic, we screen and see what works. You would have picked any of these drugs based on hypotheses or just predictions. I had to come to start a screening. So we took those six or seven best drugs and made combinations of those and they had been tested and Alzheimer's mice right now as we speak. And the ones that look best for hitting what we think they should hit in mice, those would then be put into clinical trials and patients for the next step to say, are we hitting the pathologies we expect to with knowing we purpose drugs? And if they work, the pathway to getting them into patients because they already know it and say for being literally two threads shorter than normal. That makes perfect sense. I'm sure you have people honing you for what are the most promising so far because Alzheimer's is just such a widespread problem. Well, for the drugs, we stay quiet because we don't want people to take on a prescribed drug awfully. No, until we know more. But you also looked at natural. Natural, yes, yes, really. Yeah, for the natural products, it's different. For natural products, I do share it with family and friends. I share it with the local football team, the Patriots. I share it with people in need saying, look, I take these personally, I'm getting older, considered to be safe by the FDA. We see combinations of these help clear the amyloid or stop the tangles and inflammation. I share it with family and friends. I have a, when I do that, I have a huge disclaimer. It says, this is not clinical. We have no clinical evidence that I work yet. We're planning to clinical trials in the future. This is lab-based evidence. I take them personally, they're deemed to be safe, but who knows? So I have to put that disclaimer there. This is not advice from mass general Harvard. And I share it with family and friends. I share it with my rock star musician friends who need help and it's amazing. And it totally, and again, never substitute anecdotes for clinical trials, but anecdotally, I've gotten so much amazing feedback whether it be an actual football player, an extra rock star who did too many drugs into 70s or all the person who's having memory issues. And anecdotally, I'm very inspired to do the trials and get to South America because we're seeing, and of ones saying that they're feeling better. And I want to those out of ones. And I know how much better I feel. I'm having my knee surgery next week. So I was told to stop all my supplements in advance because you never know what they do. So I haven't been on these supplements now for since the beginning of the month. And I'm fine, but I feel the difference. I feel the difference in sharpness and focus by not being on them. Well now that you've thoroughly teased our audience, you should probably tell us about the natural products that you find most beneficial. Well, I like to do that in an email with a disclaimer. Like in other words, I think each person who gets to have to have the disclaimer. So I have to discuss this with a master. But they said, look, don't publicly announce these things. You can provide it in a written email with a discount. You know, email me, rtansy.mgh.harvard.edu. I'll send you the list with a disclaimer, but I do it carefully now because you don't want to just think you take this, people do it willy nilly. And they might say, oh, Tansy has clinical evidence. I don't have clinical evidence. Well, they might recruit. So I like to do it in writing with that disclaimer. But this is something that I've been working with the patriots for nine seasons. And this is my tenth season where I just had a meeting with them last week where I update the list every year and to say, these are the natural products that might help with these poor guys who are getting bangs on the head every day who are increased risk for tangles and inflammation. And no guarantees. They don't have the clonker evidence. But it's better than nothing here to do for student because you can take a morning to try to offset what's happening in your brain with all those banks that are ahead of your day. No, I'm glad you're doing that. It's a big problem in football and other sports as well. So I have one last question. You are the only scientist I know who plays with rock bands and is a prolific scientist. I want to make sure our listeners understand that you're not just goofing off. You're a prolific scientist, hundreds and hundreds. The science is number one. Hundreds of publications. I think 600, 700 maybe articles. Over 700 and over 165,000 scientists. And for the non-scientists, that's very prolific production. And you've just mentioned the Patriots. You have two Super Bowl rings for your work with them. So you're pretty unique. And the theory on STEM talk, the whole idea of the show is for the double secret selection committee, which I share. And all votes are unanimous. The idea is to select some of the most interesting people working in science and technology. And the selection committee obviously did its work. So would you tell us how do you manage to accomplish all that you do? You have the same 24-hour day that the rest of us have. I guess I do it in spurts. So there was that time between 2010 and 2018, where I wrote the three New York Times best sellers and that took a lot of my time. And it was also during that time, I was recording records with Alice Smith and Joe Perry and others and that took time. And then my science was going on, because luckily I have really good people working with me. I run a unit of 10 labs, which 70 people were putting my own lab. And then around 20, when I finished writing the third book with Deepak Shoper, I said, man, I got to get back to it. Enough of this. Enough rock and roll, enough books. I still have my research going. I was publishing papers. But I said, OK, now it's nose to the grindstone. I'm not writing any books. I'm going to stop doing the studio stuff in music. I will continue to help the Patriots. I was on the sidelines for games. And I said, no city grindstone. And I got back to the lab and only did that. And all my activity was in Excel sheets and data. And it paid off. I mean, this year alone, I think I just co-authored my 35th publication just this year alone. That didn't happen in 2016 while I was writing books. So you have to know when to do something new. And you have to also know when to say, hey, I have to get back to business. And you don't do it all at once. You do it out in periods of time as your intuition and your own body and brain and mind and spirit tell you. And so right now, yeah, I still work on my studio. I'm writing some music for some people, work with engineers who record me in my own studio. I've no longer doing the sidelines for the Patriots, but I meet with them by Zoom to help them with brain health. I am going to write the Sheel book because it's due and I think I can help people. But it's all about just, you can't do it all at once. You have to do it in periods of time and spirit. And you have to always know when your top priority must come back to the fore. And that is science. Science and research for us. I can genuinely say, despite having done all of these different things in my life, nothing makes me happier than a very large Excel sheet that almost crashes my computer with a 5.5-8 where I can sort data. That is my greatest joy outside of my family. Well, you've managed to do quite a lot. And you're working in spurts model, I think, is a good guide for many others as well. And this has been great fun, Rudy. Thanks for coming on this show. We've been looking forward to it. And we appreciate it. Thank you. It's been a really fun conversation. It has been. Thanks again. STEM Time. STEM STEM Time. STEM STEM. STEM Talk. Rudy is quite an interesting fellow. He has two Super Bowl rings, place keyboards with bands like the Arrowsmith, writes books with Deepak Chopra, and somehow finds time to run an absolutely thriving lab and make very important discoveries that are really driving a deeper understanding of Alzheimer's disease. As our listeners know, STEM Talk is about long-form conversations with some of the most interesting people in the world of science and technology. Rudy is a fascinating character and an excellent scientist. So the Double Circuit Selection Committee found him to be a perfect fit for STEM Talk. Perhaps more importantly, he has really done a great job of spreading the word about what we can do to maintain brain health as we age. There is a helpful podcast interview with Rudy on the Harvard Magazine website that you could check out if you want information about steps to take to maintain brain health. We'll be sure to link to it in our show notes. This is Ken Ford signing off for now until we meet again on STEM Talk. Thank you for listening to STEM Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, STEMTalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview.