Hello, today I'm going to be making an ASMR curious cases cocktail. Now it's important that you put your headphones on for this and just so that you know this is your right ear and this is your left ear. So here we go. I'm going to be making the curious cases old-fashioned which is a delicious drink. So the first thing is I need a whiskey tumbler which I got right here and you need a spoon and then the ingredients which are a bottle of bourbon. Some bitters, I'm using Angostura's bitters. Some sugar, preferably soft brown sugar or maybe Demerara. Lots of ice and then I like a cherry on top. And the first step is to take some bitters, Angostura's bitters which comes in a bottle like this. And I'm just going to take the top off. Take my glass and just get a big dash of bitters in there. And the next stage is a big teaspoon of brown sugar. In the case in my glass like this, I'm going to put a dash of whiskey in there to dissolve it. And I'm going to do a long stir so that's all dissolved. It takes a long time to dissolve all the sugar. Whiskey and sugar. And sugar. And sugar. I am getting tingles here but it's not from the ASMR. It's because it's delicious. It's 11 o'clock in the morning, the studio 60 CD at the BBC. And I'm making an old fashioned. And I'm going to take that all do. And the next stage is to add a whole handful of ice which I've got here. And an ice bucket. So, some ice. I'm going to use my hand instead. Another stir. And the next stage is to fill the glass with another big slug of whiskey. Now I've got a drinks measure but I'm going to free pour because that's how you make a proper old fashioned. So that goes in. Give it another stir to make sure all that sugar is dissolved. I'm going to add a little bit more ice. And then the final touch which not everyone likes but I do is to put a cherry in. Now these are cocktail cherries with stem. A little bit of syrup to go with it. That case in the glass and give it a stir. And that is my curious case is old fashioned which I'm now going to taste. And that is absolutely perfect. Cheers.
