I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello. Hannah's just explained to me what we're actually doing in this recording session. And it's to announce that we've got next week the first of the new series of the curious cases. I actually think we've got some of the best episodes ever in this new series. And I know that I say that every time, but it's because I believe that our performance is monotonically increasing. Is what you want increasing? Get you better. So we have two episodes, a double episode on the moon because we love the moon. It's quite odd to say on the moon. There is. And the question itself is what would the earth be like if there were two moons? Yeah, but we took that as an excuse to find out what, you know, where the moon came from, what the moon's made of, all kinds of moon based stuff. There's a lot of moon stuff and other things. And other things. We also, among the other things that we have coming up in this series, Adam and I together went to go and visit a stage hypnotist. Yes. Yes. And you'll have to wait to find out what happened, but one of us was successfully hypnotised much to the amusement of the other one. Yes. I think that's definitely fair to say. You'll have to find out what actually happened in that episode. We've also got a brilliant question about the period at the table. Will it ever be filled? So some proper hardcore chemistry? Yeah. We don't do chemistry very often. We do not. We do not. We do not. We do not. We've got explosions. They've got colours in metals. We've got covalent bonds. This is perfect podcast fodder. I love a free radical once in a while. And impossibly my favourite episode that we've done so far, and I realise we do say that quite a lot. We have the full band who wrote and played the theme tune because we're doing a question about why notes sound different on different instruments. Yeah. We played the same, playing A on two different things and it sounds different. What is that? Well, we've got Melodica. We've got a kazoo. I make a kazoo. We've got six bells. A cello, a guitar, a piano, a saxophone. I mean, an eight tuning forks. If that is not enough variety. And a drill. And a drill. We blew our entire year's budgets on that one studio session. So I hope you enjoy it. So remember to send in your questions for the next series to curiouscasesetbeamsci.co.uk And also your entries for the prestigious award winning. It's up there with an MBE. Close to Olympic level. It's an Oscar. It's all of those things and so much more. Curio of the week, the badge. Yeah. Have you been sending out the badges? Oh, Michelle's not in. She's finally got around to it. She is not in. I haven't seen any of them. We need to ask our listeners. If you've received one, could you let us know? Can I have one? Well, we'll see. Can I have to be Curio of the week first? Yeah. And I've got to submit something to make myself Curio of the week. You've got to learn it. It's actually hard. It's hard. It's hard. I mean, your name's in the title of the programme. I find. You know what I'm going to do. I'm going to send in a letter. Then you'll be sorry. And then you won't have one. Yeah, but I come in before you when we do this programme. And I'll just delete it from the inbox. We'll see about that. We'll see about that. Right. So that's what we've got coming up in the next six weeks. Six new episodes for you and a challenge for me to win Curio of the Week. For the fun, fly, don't forget to download. Shoot it every week. Live on this night is so shooting every week. Don't forget to download. Was a fun cry. Live on this night is your year.
