I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. Science. I like it. MUSIC Hello, the Curios. Here is your one week warning. Hmm, we are about to embark on the journey together. It's going to be a journey that involves some highs, lots of lows. LAUGHTER It's the middles. It's quite a lot of middle, in fact. And an entire 12 episode. A full dozen episodes for you in this run coming up. That 12 has twice as many as six. It is. Also, the episodes are twice as long as they used to be. So that, Adam Rutherford, is four times. There's a lot of us happening here. This is just one of our short wake you up. Remind you that we still exist. Because as if you know, we have to come to the opposite. You haven't forgotten us. Of course, of course. We have been away for quite a long time. But still, we've got lots of fun stuff coming up in this series. We've got a question on hamsters. We do. Well, I think that's all you need to know for now. There's a lot of hamsters involved in that. There's a lot of hamsters. We've got a question on cheese. So there's a lot of cheese, in fact. There's quite a lot of cheese in the studio right now. Which means that you can work out at what point we recorded this trail if you're eagerly. And there's an episode on horrible noises. There's an episode of Mars. We've got lots of good stuff coming up. I mean, we're not going to list them all. There's been 12 of them now. 12, and this is just to say hello. And what we do sometimes when we do these little previews to wake you up to warn you that the good stuff is about to arrive is we talk about some papers that you sometimes send us. Please do send us more because this is so much fun. So real academic papers that are perhaps on the... Perhaps the... Less serious and less serious. The sillier signs. Well, I mean, it's not always clear if the scientists are fully and totally aware that there's stuff to say. I mean, sometimes they're definitely out, right? Like, for example, there's a paper which we came across which was, would bored be born if bone were born before born? I think the author knew what they were doing and that paper... Do that again. Would bored be born if bone... BOM, I'd say it, B-O-H-M. I don't know what you're doing at all. BOM will born before born. Jason born? I don't know. This is a reference to Jason born and James Bond. I discuss a hypothetical historical context in which a BOM-like deterministic interpretation of the Shreddinger equation could have been proposed before the born probabilistic interpretation and argue that in such a context, the Copenhagen-Borne interpretation would probably have never achieved great popularity among physicists. I think they knew what they were doing. I think they did. So there's a great story which I'm going to remember only scant details from, but there was a paper by the physicist Gamov who was significant, I think, in Big Bang cosmology in the mid-40s and 50s. If you say so. But he co-authored a paper with someone else whose surname was Alpha and he found someone who's... Beta. Oh, that makes me happy. The sole purpose... That makes me happy. That the paper is authored by Alpha V to Gamov. That makes me happy. Yeah, I absolutely love that. There's another classic one now. This was from a paper in 1974 in the Journal of Animal Ecology. And the paper itself is interactions between the Salamander, Siren, Intermedia and the Keystone Predator, Nautothalamus Viridescence. Of course. authored by John Falf and William Resetartis. Short, it's a very decent paper, I haven't actually read it. But the key thing is that... You know how... When there were multiple authors on a paper, there were various protocols to determine the author order because papers get cited, they tend to get cited by the first author who traditionally does the majority of the work. And the senior author, like the principal investigator with Professor, their ultimate boss tends to be the last author. Well, sometimes that is confusing or cannot be worked out and on a two-author paper, how do you do this? So the footnote on this paper is, the order of authorship was determined from a 25-game croquet series held at Imperial College Field Station during the summer of 1973. LAUGHTER That's exactly how we decided to call this program, Rutherford and Fryer, Rutherford. LAUGHTER We do have a pretty remarkable paper, though, to share with you. I think this one is almost where they have abandoned, you know? It is, actually. You can't get cured over the week, because we're not in the main series yet, but you could be Curio of the trailer. LAUGHTER And that's Michael Hunter, who has written to us, he said he studied physics at the university, he loved listening to the show. We do like hearing that people like listening to the show. LAUGHTER He references some of the papers that we talked about on one of these other trails, such as the time when scientists gave hamsters Viagra. And I think there was another one about farting snakes. It's all high-brown stuff. Yeah. He quotes us, though. He quotes ourselves back to us. He says, if you have ever come across any scientific papers that you think fit into this category of slightly amusing, but maybe not where they have a whole program, then please do let us know. You can email us, as always, curious cases of BBC.com.uk. And we will, which is bolded and italicised, feature them in a podcast. Well, we are people of our world, Michael, and here we are featuring it. MUSIC Right, and so this is a paper from the Journal of Interdisciplinary Science Topics. I have to confess, not a journal I've spent lots of time reading in the past, and it comes from two scientists from the Centre for Interdisciplinary Science at the University of Leicester, published in 2014, Devon Fosbury and practic Lakotia. And the title is, playing the Flores Lava in real life. LAUGHTER And I get the impression he doesn't mean the imaginary person of the Flores Lava. Shall I read the abstract? Come on. The popular children's game, the Flores Lava, seems entertaining when played, using only the imagination. But it is not widely known what the effects would be if this game were to be played using real love. I think there's a reason for that. I think there's a reason for that. This paper investigates where the player in this game in real life would be possible, and what effects that would have on the human body. LAUGHTER OK, I mean, it's a proper paper. There's the abstract introduction. Section 1 is called the biological effects of gases produced by lava in summary. The primary best is it with the safer incursions. I'll just read the final sentence. People in areas of lower concentrations of CO2 might experience difficulty breathing, dizziness, impaired condition before eventually losing consciousness. It seems like a reference to that. All of which would make playing the game quite difficult. LAUGHTER And then there's another section, air temperature at the above lava. There's some equations in here. I know how you like it. Of course. Like an equation. But let me just read the conclusion in full, because I really think it deserves it, and it's quite short. In conclusion, from our calculations, we can see that it would not be possible to play a game of the Flores Lava, either indoors or outdoors, for more than a few seconds. However, however, a lover, however, and a conclusion. However, the authors of this paper do believe that it may be possible to play a short game of the Walls Lava if convection currents are taken into account in the room has been played in. Does not have a ceiling in the participants' attempt to inhale as few gases as possible. Well, I mean, this has completely upended my summer plans for a trip to the mouth of a volcano with my children, isn't it? So that's really put paid to that. I've got something... Oh, I've got something for you. OK, so this isn't quite a silly science paper, but this is more like a silly science mistake that's been spotted in the wild. So I've got a group of master's students that I'm teaching at the moment. I was just getting some material together for them. And that idea came up of how many decimal places should you work to. How many decimal places should you use? Because obviously, sometimes people use way too many decimal places. And I found a really great example to illustrate exactly this. And it comes from a place in Australia where they have a number of very important preserved specimens of insects. They've got a whole catalogue of them. And they've got these records online of exactly where they're kept. Right? So the records are things like, oh, this is a specimen of Desmox, Todis, whatever. I'm not even going to try with the lights. They've got all the details on it. But they also have the latitude and longitude of where this insect is kept. Amazingly, though, what they've decided to do is to keep in all of the decimal places of these, in this location, to the point where they've got 12 decimal places. Right? So they've got latlon to 12 decimal places. Very specific. Where do you like to know how specific it is? So seven decimal places, that gives you up to about 11 millimeters. So you could say the weather you're in with in 11. Oh no, they didn't think that seven was enough. Eight gives you 1.1 millimeters. Of course, the ninth decimal place will give you up to about 110 microns. Right? That's not specific enough. And won't further. And by the time you get to 12, you're basically looking at the width of an angstrom. Now, I'm going to go out on a limb here and say, I don't think there are any insects. That's small. On the nude. Such precise labeling. Yeah, I've got one other one, which came up quite recently. Not so not sent in. This was just my normal troll of looking for stupid animal papers. And there is no animal stupider than the duck-build platypus. Well, they didn't think it was real when they first saw it, right? They thought it'd been stitched together. That is very true. Anyway, this is actually based on looking at museum specimens of platypus. And I'm not sure what the motivation for this was, but a paper published in the journal, Mammalia, very recently, that lead author who's called Paula Anich, they decided to look at platypus's under UV light. Why? Don't know. What did they find? Their multicolored. Really? Yeah, like full disco glow multicolored, they floresce. Platypus is totally floresce in multicolored. I need to see a picture of this. Rainbow disco platypus. So just a few Google. Can I look Google for a recent? For a recent platypus, this will bring up a lot of day glow. Oh, that's cool. Oh, that's cool. They basically look like a glow stick, but with a beak. Anyway, Michael Hunter, you get an honorary curio of the week for our preview podcast to get you all warmed up. You do, but join us back here next week when we kick off our brand new Super Size series. And in the meantime, if there are any questions or a silly science papers or silly bits of science that you want to tell us about, our inbox is always open, curiouscasesatvbc.co.uk.
