Hello, Curios. We are back for Series 16. We are two metres apart, but we are indeed in the same room, which is a rare treat these days. Which means we have to shout a little bit louder at each other to be heard, because both of us are remarkably quiet people. Now, this new series is not just a socially distant series. This is also a bit of an experimental series, because as you will notice, our programme has shot up from 12 and a half minutes to a mind-bending, 27 minutes and 13 seconds, or whatever the broadcast lot is. Yes, the gods of Radio 4 decided that after 15 series, we were so brilliant, that we should go on rambling on for more than twice as long. I'm not sure that rambling on was in the instructions for what we should do. But anyway, you see, I have them here from the commissioning area, so let me just read them out. Please let Hannah and Adam do much, much more rambling about that stuff that they talk about. I think it's science. I'm not sure. Jorsten Cirli, the top dog at Radio 4, lots of love, kisses. Is it four kisses, either? Is that any moment you just made up? Yeah, I've certainly deleted it. Anyway, enjoy the new extended version of the programme, and we will be back to talk to you a little bit more nonsense after the show. I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. Science. I like it. Adam, did you not eat any breakfast today? I excuse me. We've been doing this for 16 series now, and this is just basic broadcasting etiquette. No tummy rumbles, please. Yeah, sorry. Apologies. You just passed me that banana, but yeah, you did the intro. OK, all right. Well, today's question was sent into curious cases at BBC.Cody.uk by James, who is age 12, and he asks, where are the wild tummy's rumble? I'll translate, shall I? Yeah, we'll remind. OK, all right. That was why do our tummy's rumble? And when they do, does it always mean that we're hungry? Excellent question, James. Excuse me. To get to the bottom of this one, we need to go back nearly 200 years in time and all the way over the Atlantic Ocean. On the morning of June 6, 1822, Alexis St. Martin stood in the American fur company store near the Canadian border. He was a voyager. That is, somebody paddled canoes full of fur pelts from Native American villages to trading posts. But his life was about to unexpectedly change and change the science of digestion forever. A musket accidentally went off and shots St. Martin in the lower chest from just three feet away. The other trader sent for William Beaumont, a US Army doctor, and Beaumont found St. Martin in a pretty bad state with a visible hole in his abdomen that was bigger than, quote, the palm of a man's hand. Yeah, well, this is why I didn't eat earlier. Because Beaumont found St. Martin. He had several broken ribs, a lacerated diaphragm, and lung. And now I need you to brace yourself here, Hannah, poking out from the hole. And I quote, a portion of the stomach pouring out the food he had taken for his breakfast through an orifice big enough to admit the full finger. Was this guy still alive? Oh, yes. And there is so much more. Because Beaumont, the doctor, thought quite reasonably that St. Martin was surely a goner, but amazingly, he actually survived this gut shot. And a year later, St. Martin was largely healed, except for one unfortunate legacy, a gastric fistula. I mean, I can guess. But I'm not sure I want to know what that means. A fistula, well, basically, that is a sort of anatomical bypass. Hey, why don't you read this bit? OK, all right. So in this case, part of the shot hole that stayed open, covered by a flap of skin, going directly into his stomach, he had an open hole in his abdomen, covered by a flap of skin. It's horrendous. Yeah. Yeah. Now Beaumont, he did offer to sow this whole up, but Alexis and Martin had pretty much had enough of 19th century surgery techniques. But the doctor realized that this was an extraordinary scientific opportunity. And he somehow persuaded St. Martin to contractually agree to have observations and experiments carried out on himself for years into his stomach through a little flap. Exactly that. I'm going to go out on a limb here and guess that this arrangement wasn't particularly fun for St. Martin. Right. Well, it's going to get a bit gross again. So hold on to your lunch. Beaumont, who's a doctor, carried out tons of experiments through this hole into St. Martin's stomach. And they included things like extracting the digestive juices and seeing how quickly they liquefied various food stuff, things like bits of cooked meat or vegetables. And then he went one step further and he tied bits of the same food onto a thread and dangled them into St. Martin's stomach to see how long liquefaction took that way. You've got a guy with a gafing hole into his stomach, flap of skin covering it, and a doctor dangling bits of food in on a string. That's my friend is 19th century gastroenterology. See, the key discovery was that the foodstuffs liquefied much faster inside his stomach than when it was put inside the vial. Oh, that was the point of the story. Yes, it was. Well, thank you very much for that absolutely revolting tale. Can we stop now? Because I called up University of Cambridge, Genesis, Dr. Jars-Yo, and he got to the same point a lot quicker. The tummy rumbles because it is undergoing, there's a word for it called peristalsis. So it's kind of like a washing machine, right? And the stomach goes, and it's actually moving around the gastric juices in some of the gases. But the tummy rumble doesn't only come from the tummy, it also comes from the intestine. And there is peristalsis there as well, but rather than a washing machine, the muscles around the intestine kind of move the food in one direction towards the pushute. The rumble is, did you just call it a pushute? I did. Is it not really a logical or pushute? You just haven't had that phrase before. It's just pleased me greatly. It's just, I'm off to empty my pushutes. Yeah, we definitely have different thresholds for what we find revolting. Oh, we're different in many ways, Adam. Okay, so when we're talking about tummy rumbles, so it's not just the stomach that's rumbling. No, so as Jars says, you probably get the most washing machine like churning in the stomach, but there is moving all the way from the esophagus into the stomach, the small intestine, the large intestine, and eventually out the rectum through the anus. And that is one of my favorite human-based facts, which is that we have this tube running all the way through us from top to bottom. Essentially, mathematically speaking, topologically speaking, if you will, humans, we're basically doughnut shapes. You don't have to be mathematical about this because I completely agree, and this is like a key idea in evolutionary history that basically almost all animals were just tubes. We're basically tubes. We have an entrance and an exit. And in fact, in taxonomic terms, where we classify animals, we're known as deuteristomes, which literally means two openings. Two openings? Yeah, but it's not, I mean, it's kind of one there, right? Isn't it? It's just one all the way through it. Well, the deuteristomes have an opening at both ends, which is our mouth and the other end. And this is kind of a key idea on how we got to this stage, how animals became like your doughnuts, because we think that maybe the first complex organisms were like flat pancakes of cells floating on the sea. And we noticed from these things called stromatolites in Australia, which sort of settled down and they fossilized as these sort of mushroom-like things. But to get food, a much more efficient way of extracting food from the environment is actually to be a tube rather than a flat thing, because stuff can go in one end and you have control over it in an enclosed space. And then it has to go out the other end, hence all symmetrical animals are basically tubes. Well, that's tummy rumbles in a nutshell, right? You're optimizing what's going on inside the tube, hence all of this washing machine stuff going on. Yeah, exactly. So, you know, we've evolved not just to be a straight tube, but to have a massive mussely organ system, which is, you know, 25 feet long. And to be honest, I'm surprised it isn't more audible. Aha. Well, there is a reason for that. The sounds happen all the time, right? The only reason why you hear it when you are hungry is because there's no food there and there's nothing to muffle the sound. And so the rumbling is an empty stomach because there is no food there to muffle the gastric juices and stuff flowing around. Is this a bit like heartbeat, then? So, they're happening all the time, we're just not aware of it. That's exactly right. And so, you will only feel it when your stomach is empty. I have a feeling, though, when I am hungry, and then I see someone's bullings and delicious cakes, or, you know, you start watching a food program and they're preparing something absolutely gorgeous on the screen. It feels like my stomach grumbles more. Is there something in there? Are we reacting to stimuli? Yes, it's the answer. So, in other words, there probably is going to be an increase of frequency of the noise when you see something because then you say, oh, look, donut, or look burger, or whatever it is you like to eat. And because it's empty and begins to think, oh, oh, I'm about to get a donut or I'm about to get a burger. So, yes, I think the cues, the visual cues which you actually get from food will then prepare not only your stomach, but everything else in your body to say prepare to receive calories. And that's probably why you do get an increase in frequency when you actually see food when your stomach is empty. Well, we've talked about this before, in fact, when we did a program on why certain bad foods, that's ones that, you know, are deemed unhealthy, why they taste so flipping good. Yeah, now, you can donate that program on BBC Sounds, or wherever you get your podcasts, along with 70 other episodes of this program, thankfully, none of which contain a story anywhere near as gross as the one Adam regaled us with earlier. Yeah, and in almost all of them, my involvement in this show is as a guinea pig, mostly for horrible things. But this particular episode was absolutely lovely because my guinea pig experiment was that I had to have a nice breakfast with Professor Mark Meadovnik. Have you ever been to the BBC canteen? I haven't. I haven't absolutely delighted to be here. Look at this. Oh, my goodness. How many more eggs do you need? There are a lot of eggs over there. It is an awesome spectacle. That's a pile of bacon. Mm-hmm. It's self-service, so grab a plate. Right, thank you. One bacon russia or two, that's the question. It's two, is the answer. Two does sound. I am definitely having the hash browns because hash browns are food of the gods. I've got my hash browns, I've got some scrambled eggs, now I adjust like door baked beans. I'm going to have absolutely stacks of beans. All right, ready to go. OK, just coming out to pay. There you go. Thank you so much. Sitting down in a company booth, surrounded by stacks of sausages, bacon and beans, the urge to devour this fatty, carb-y feast is just overwhelming. But why is that? There is a lot of food on your plate, which might not be regarded as the paragon of health. Why is it that our bodies crave such absolute deliciousness? I'm not certainly crave this, I'm really looking forward to eating it. You just interrupt me, mid-forkful, the bacon is calling. Why is that? Well, obviously, my taste buds are really looking forward to digging into that. And that's because I've got salt taste buds, I've got sweet taste buds, I've got sour and bitter. And they're all calling out, crying out, to be ignited by this food. And they will be. They'll be a symphony of taste. So we're talking about, you're talking about taste buds, which primarily are on the tongue in the mouth. But I mean, that isn't the whole story, is it? If we say taste is on the tongue, flavor is a much bigger sensation, and it's what drives our cravings. And that's mostly in the nose. So we smell things through our nose, obviously, and that is the smell of cooking. And that gets our digestive systems going. You'll stomach grumbles. I can't wait for this. But then when you put food in your mouth, you smell it in a different way, retro-nasally. So it goes up the back through into your nose and a lot of your flavor that you taste. Almost all of the flavor you taste is from that retro-nasal smell. And that's far more sophisticated. That's thousands of flavours. I'm like, just talking about it now makes me feel hungry. The further wood which you're describing it is only matched by the eagerness that I can see. You want to eat it. And I have to say, you know, the smell inside your mouth is in proportion to how volatile lots of those flavor molecules are. And that's why it needs to be hot. A cold English breakfast, and it is getting cold. I'm slightly worrying about that. But the cold that it gets, the less flavor it will get, because it'll be let heat for these molecules to become smells inside my mouth. So we've got a real problem here. We've got a professional problem with both facing. We are required to make a radio programme here, but both of us are really hungry. The bacon is calling, and I'm afraid I'm going to have to answer that call. So just give you a minute. Yeah. Yeah, that bacon was calling me too. I wasn't even there. Yeah, and it just shows how well trained we are to respond to delicious food, even just hearing about something yummy without seeing or smelling it can make our stomach start to rumble. OK, so I want to know if this is like a perpetuating thing, then, because it does seem to me that when I notice a tummy rumble, I can go from, I'm a little bit peckish, to totally raffer-ness very quickly. So I asked Arsio if the visual and other cues that we see make us feel hungry are, in a way, does stomach grumbling itself make us feel hungry too? Ooh, I don't know. Actually, the answer to that question. But from first principles, I would have thought yes, because when you're looking at the food cues, a number of different things you want to happen. First, you want to get your body prepared to receive the food. But if your body is not being prepared, or if you're not prepared enough, then the food cues also need to make you think about food to go for the food. In other words, you only are going to reach for it if you are hungry. So I'm going to go from first principles and say yes. Well argued. Thank you. Thank you. So maybe I shouldn't be going through an argument. No, it's great. Well, well, it's good. I like it. I like it. Now, that is a scientist at work right there. He's just going to go off bash out and research right now. And is it going to include the phrase pooh-shoots? I hope so, in the title. Right, back to the question at hand. Because today it is James who asked, why do our tummies rumble? And when they do, does it always mean that we're hungry? So the how of tummy rumbling, that's a movement called peristalsis that happens not just in our stomachs, but all along our 25-foot-long digestive system. And the most audible grouse happened when your stomach is empty and there's no food to muffle the sound. But the second part of James's question is the why, why does it rumble? Does it always mean that we're hungry? So I will tell you a secret. One day I was recording for Inside Health, which is a program that I usually work on. And I hadn't had any breakfast and I had rushed it to the studio and I was recording. And the producer had to stop because my stomach was rumbling so loudly. And she said, please go and have something to eat because I do not think the nation wishes to hear your stomach rumbling. Ha, so not just me then. No, not just you. This has happened to me too. There are occasions when you are recording an audio book. We have to sit in a little cupboard for days on end and it's inevitable that there will be points where your stomach's like rumbling. And it's happened to me before where the grumbles were so loud we had to stop one time in particular where they made me eat a green apple. They had a big bowl of green apples there for this very purpose. I think green apples stop your mouth going clicky. I think like, you know, the... Yeah. Yeah. Which you don't really want to hear. No, you don't like that, do they? Really no. So eight green apple, that was fine. Muffled the tummy sounds. Unfortunately, not very good with green apples and had a bad reaction to them. And then they were just, you know, they had all sorts of other delicious sounds from my innards. And can we purchase that audio book? It's available for more good stockest. Now, this happens to everyone though, right? Happens to you, happens to me, happens to Margaret McCartney, probably happens to the Queen too. But one of the things that Margaret McCartney does as a GP is to listen to stomach rumbles. When we listen to the abdomen, we're particularly interested in the bowels to make sure the bowels are working. And we usually know that because we can hear gargling sounds, we can hear noises. And those noises have a fancy word. Borbarrigme is quite a nice sounding word as well. And Borbarrigme is the sound that you hear when the stomach's contents, so all the food that you've eaten, the fluids that you've swallowed, any air that you've swallowed, plus the acid and other products of the bow, they're in there swishing about and trying to make their way from your stomach all the way to the outside world through your bottom. And you can hear the noise of the muscles inside that tube as they're squeezing off and on to try and push all that stuff from the top all the way to the bottom. Well, there you go then. And actually, it turns out, sometimes the most concerning listen, probably isn't noise, is the sound of silence. If you can't hear any noises at all, that might mean that the bowels blocked. And there's lots of different reasons from that. So the bowel being twisted in some way to the being of destruction like a pole, or even a tumour that's in there that would need to be further investigated and treated. But there's all kinds of different causes for that. Sometimes you can hear really high pitched what's called tinkling sounds. Medical students get asked about this in exams all the time. And that might mean that the bowel is obstructed or blocked further up in the small bow. But to be honest with you, I think these things are a matter of opinion quite often rather than a pure science. There is one other sound, of course, that can sometimes be heard in certain tummies. Can you guess what it is? Is it to do with hunger? Not directly. Sometimes yes, I suppose, for particular foods and sometimes absolutely categorically not hungry at all. Is it easy to do with having a tiny human inside you? Being go. When you put the stentscope on the abdomen, of course, it's not just the bows that are in there. Women, as you know, can also have babies get pregnant and have a baby inside their uterus. And you can hear the baby's heartbeat. If you use a stethoscope, you can quite difficult to hear. But you can also use a different form of stethoscope, which is like a big trumpet that you can put to the woman's abdomen, so you can hear the baby's heartbeat. Or you can even use a little ultrasonic probe so you can hear the heartbeat. So I have to say that's one of the happiest things that I do as a doctor. Is find a little heartbeat in there that usually gives great delight to the mother. Now, I remember this very clearly. When we went for the ultrasound from my first daughter and the sonographer turned on the audio of the machine and their little heartbeat say, go like the clappers. And I've got this distinct memory of thinking, this sounds exactly like mid-90s German techno. You know, ch-ch-ch-ch. That's your main memory for that moment. Yeah, like, you know, one glove on maybe a glow stick, pumping out some fat beats. You've been through this. You must have had the same experience. Yeah, my own writing memory. I was just overwhelmed with your love and joy. Adam, but... Not Berlin 96, your poor wife. Your poor wife. Okay, speaking of offspring, though, especially as they have been more at home than usual of late, Margaret Sonny also had a query on this very topic. So the question that I have from my 12-year-old jid is why can some people not process some foods? Hang on, if Margaret Sonny jid was there, why didn't he ask us directly? There were some unconferent reports that he may have still been in bed. Anyway, I put this to chance you. I mean, I guess I'll use me as an example. I can't drink milk, you know? It causes all kinds of gastrointestinal distress that goes beyond tummy rumbles, shall we say. And so I think different people, because of their genetics, are gonna be able to eat different things. So that's one thing. So I happen to be ethnically Chinese. And while I could drink milk as a child, if I drank milk now, it would cause all kinds of havoc. And that's because of my genes. Part of the problem and why you actually end up having issues are twofold, right? So if you have something that you can't digest properly or you have an issue with, it's not absorbed. And if it's not absorbed, it has to travel somewhere. Now, when it actually gets to the area where the gut microbiome live, where the bugs live, and they begin to ferment whatever is there. So for example, why does lactose give me issues? Because the moment it passes the small intestine, that's not where the issue is. It's when it gets to the large intestine. And then what happens is the lactose has not been absorbed because I can't absorb it. The bugs begin to work on the lactose, producing a gas, okay? And therefore making me feel bloated. And B, because now there's more sugar, lactose is a sugar, in the large intestine than there should be, or most of it happens. Water comes in, therefore making your normally, perfectly formed poop, a watery, and so therefore causing issues. And all of that creates sound and noise. And so if you are intolerant, or if something is giving you issues in your gut, that is why you would necessarily want to listen to your gut. Because all of that water and gas going, Bsh, bsh, bsh, that you can hear with a stethoscope. Turns out though, it's not just ethythescapes or even ultrasound machines that medics can use to listen into what's going on in our gut. Right, because they can also dangle bits of string inside Canadian fur trade as stomachs as well. I thought that we left that story behind us, no. This is actually about the Nobel Prize winning microbiologist, Barry Marshall, who discovered that stomach ulcers were caused by bacteria. Do you know how he did it? No. Well, he very bravely drank a soup that was packed full of the bacteria helico-bacter pylori. Is that the bacteria that gives you stomach ulcers? Yes, but we only know that because he did this very experiment. So he drank the soup. And they were expecting this to cause something, but only after a few weeks. But in fact, after three days, he already had stomach troubles. And terrible halitosis, which was identified by his mother, smelling his breath. What was he doing standing so close to his mother? Science is what he was doing. And then after eight days, he had massive ulcers, which they found by looking inside his stomach via endoscopy. And then at 14 days, he took an antibiotic and was pretty much miraculously cured. And then got a Nobel Prize. And then got a Nobel Prize. All in a couple of weeks' work. Well, since then, he has started work on new research called the Noisy Guts Projects. And this is inspired by the microphones that you can use to listen for termites hiding in walls. So Barry is trialling an acoustic belt, which is where the recordings that you heard at the beginning came from. And this can be worn to help diagnose and treat conditions like irritable bowel syndrome. The belt has four microphones on it and so that we can do upper and lower quadrants and left and right. And so that should give us information, say, the top left would be the stomach, the lower left would be the sigmoid, the lower right would be Ileosycholvalvinsychum. And the upper right might be, I don't know, hepatic colon, something like that would do a denom. So all those things can make little noises and by saying which one's loudest and the patterns, probably you can tell what's going on there to a certain extent and say to the patient, it's definitely irritable bowel syndrome. And the thing about syndrome is that we use that term in medicine when it's common, it's a bit vague. We're not sure exactly what the cause is. And we haven't got a test for it. So anything that's a bit like that, we put it in that basket and call it a syndrome. And we hope that one day someone will be able to refine it a little bit more and separate out the different components, different types. And then we might be able to offer some treatment for it or understand it better. This is not just a belt with microphones in it. It is also attached to an artificial intelligence system that's learning to distinguish a good or normal gut sound from those that might indicate IBS. With artificial intelligence, it learns it's getting a bit complicated out of my depth now. But we have electronic engineers and mathematicians looking at this, working out the programs. But you put a person on it, person says, I'm perfectly healthy. I eat everything, never had any problem with my bells or pains or anything. OK, so we say, right, you're normal. And we record the sounds. And we tell the computer that this is a normal person. And we collect a whole lot of those. And then we also randomly in there have people who say, I've been to the doctor with these pains. I've had every investigation known to man, everything came back 100% normal, but I still get the pain. So that is a person with irritable bowel. And they will be doing things like different diets, maybe some medications, etc. So you tell the computer that this one's an irritable bowel. And then after it collects information on 30, 40, 50, 60, 100 or so, it says, hey, I can discriminate now between these two groups. Most people with irritable bowel have this, this and this. And the most people who are 100% normal don't have these features. And so what are the features? Well, you could have a high or low-pitched sounds. And the duration of the sound, you could look at that. So you can see in some of the publications, we have this sort of diagrams of what these sounds look like. On a silisco. And then you could have a pattern with several different ones and then a silent period and then hyperactive period. So it could be quite complicated, but it means that because it's a belt and it's a computer, it doesn't get bored with the whole thing. And it can listen for an hour or so. It can listen before a meal, after a meal. And so all those kinds of things can help it work. And ultimately, what we want to say is that patient comes into the doctor, seemingly healthy, complains of pains, the doctor said, well, before we go doing expensive investigations on you, why don't you just get some recordings on this belt. And then we'll look at the result and see whether we want to proceed. The noisy guts project is still in its relatively early stages. But there is hope that it might find out what the causes of irritable bowel syndrome are. We might find that irritable bowel syndrome is three or four different types and the ones that are lower down, not the same as ones that are higher up. So there might be a food allergy or food intolerance or something going on there, whereas lower down, it could even be something new, like microbiome or some disturbance in your digestion in the colon. Hopefully, we would also be able to say to people, it sounds a bit atypical, we'd better whiz off and go and get the full workup. And maybe we would make the dangerous diagnosis a little earlier because of the information we're getting. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to why our tummies rumble, can we say K-soul? Yes, we can, Dr. Fry. There are many reasons why our tummies rumble. When we're hungry and our stomach's empty, that is when rumble's are most audible. But the movement that causes the rumble's peristalsis is actually happening all the time. And it can be heard lower down the digestive system in the intestines with the aid of a stethoscope. But the rumble's aren't just indicative of hunger by listening closely to sounds over time. We could improve our understanding of some of the most common bowel diseases. So, tell me, Rutherford, tell us a lot more than that we forgot to eat breakfast. Right, so that was the episode in which I was forced to eat a banana at the beginning, which you quite enjoyed. Yeah, it did quite a while for that banana to clear from your voice. It is still a bit, I've got a bit of a teeth right now. Yeah, lovely. Yeah. Well, it turns out though, we should tell you, but making a programme under lockdown, not the simplest thing, not the easiest thing. No, no, it's not. And we've had some quite comical test recordings because we did all of the interviews in our separate houses, about five miles apart from each other. And while I was in my bedroom with a doovel on my head, I brought an outdoor tent indoors and created an entire doovel cave. And the sound recordings from these home constructed thoughts were so good that the trail that we recorded to go out and BBC Radio 4 mysteriously got lost in the system. It did, didn't it? It went through several people and somehow was never found again. So, when you see all those interviews with people on the telly, in fact, you've done a few of them. I haven't, you were on, have I got news for you. And they've got very clever bookshelves behind you with carefully placed books. Look at, see how clever I am with all these books. Actually, what we were doing was hiding under a doovel. I was so hot in there. You were down the side of your bed. I was. And you'd take in just a bit of wood from the garden to pop it up. It's true, an old broom in fact. And I had to take my shirt off at one point because it was so hot in there that I was going to pass out. Anyway, this is how we are bringing you series 16 of the Cure's cases. And not only that, not only are we getting around the difficulties of lockdown, we also as loyal listeners may already be aware. We also said goodbye last season to our wonderful producer, Michelle Martin. So we have a new time that world, didn't she? She ran away screaming for the hills just as the whole of the BBC and indeed civilization clapped. Loaded. Yeah, always new shoes smart that Michelle Martin. Anyway, when it came to appointing a new producer, Adam and I, we drew up a short list. And we managed to get the producer that we wanted. Yes, and that is Jen Winthee, who's a brilliant producer, who's been at Radio 4 for a while. And we've both worked with her, Norton Cure's cases. But now she has to face the prospect of making a program which is slightly different to the previous 15 series in terms of length and entirely different from the previous 150 years of radio broadcasting in terms of pandemic. It made particularly difficult that three of us have never actually physically been in the same space at one time. No, we haven't ever. No, but I think that over the course of the coming episodes, you will start to see why Jen Winthee was on our short list. Yeah, and don't forget, she's now crewing the inbox, the inbox that we couldn't even find the keys to. So remember to send your questions to Jen. And silly bits and lovely bits and all of those bits. Send your bits to Jen at Cure's cases at BBC.co.nk. Not that I could get away with that. But apparently not. So send them to Cure's cases at BBC.co.uk and Jen will look at them and decide what we need to do next. And one of the bits that she's decided we need to do next is as always our Cure of the Week. Rather than a prize Cureo of the Week. Yeah, they deemed this wasn't good enough for broadcast. All the rest of it goes on the radio. But from this bit, this is just our private own little bit that we have for ourselves. And we have a new Cure of the Week this week. Yes, so we get some, my amazing things, we get some pictures, we get some jingles. But Helena and Joseph Baxendale sent us an animation, which we download and we're going to watch right now. Basically excellent. It starts off with Adolfo Ferd and I as Lego, oh hang on, you're a Lego figurine. I might be some other, what's it called, part of the pocket. No, that is Lego. Am I polypocket? No, no, no, that is Lego. But that's the new series of Lego, which is aimed specifically at younger women. Sure, nerd. Okay. It's only because I spent most of yesterday building a whole sort of music studio based on these characters. So both of us, we are lying on a chalkboard as with our original photoshoot some four years ago when I didn't know Adam very well and they said, coming here, lie down on this chalkboard with a mustache. With a giant mustache on. And she's put, she's mimicked it. Huge, I mean, I don't even know whether these are the stars, they look like Harry slugs. Longer than our bodies. Yeah, catapulters. Okay, so it's a stop motion animation. In console, a little producer in the top. There's lots of question marks. It's all kind of moving around. Looks absolutely brilliant. And we will post this to the website. There's us reading letters. There's us trying to answer questions. Could I just comment on the white hair in this? I realise there's a 45 year old man. I'm not as hairy as I once was on the top of my head. But the wig that Helena has put on me actually looks like it's falling off. I mean, it looks like I'm wearing a wig. I think I definitely fed better in this. I think my hair might be plus to seen though. I'm down with that. I'm down with that. Well listen, Helena and Joseph, we absolutely love it. You are our official curiose of the week. For your brilliant animation. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. To Curious Cases at BBC.co.uk. And more from us next week.
