I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. It's another episode of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. And one day I'm going to do that in a way that doesn't make me cringe when I listen back to it. That makes me laugh every time today. We have got a question that's come in from a younger Curio. She's called Ellie Cook. And she also said, I love this podcast because the topics are not based on boring things. They're based on fun things like vegetables, red hair, the cake, bushwine and all the others. That's brilliant, Ellie. You're very close to being Curio of the week. And we haven't even got into the show yet. And that is because today's episode and her question is all about dinosaurs, which is just the best. Indeed. And for all you dino lovers, we actually have two further dinosaur related questions that we have stuck into the pod at the end. So stay tuned for that. Sometimes we deal with the grand and the epic. But today's question is small and perfectly formed. Ellie Cook aged 11 asks, what is the tiniest dinosaur? Okay. So at first glance, this may seem like a bit of a sort of top Trump's question, but it turns out that size is one of the very first things that paleontologists try to work out when they find a new fossil. And we are currently living in a golden age of dinosaur discovery. On average, one new species of dinosaur is discovered every week. That is right. And another thing that many people don't realize is just how incredibly successful dinosaurs were in an evolutionary sense is something that really gets under the skin of paleontologists, Steve Brusati. It pains me every time, you know, I see on the news some politician being referred to as a dinosaur, some washed up celebrity being referred to as a dinosaur because dinosaurs were a success story. They rule the earth for more than 150 million years. And they evolved into all sorts of different fantastic creatures that lived on every corner of the planet. And some of them were the hugeest, biggest, most colossal things that ever lived on land, you know, animals that were almost the size of a 737 jet airplane. Other ones were tiny little ones that, you know, could burrow. And there was everything in between. So dinosaurs, they were the ultimate evolutionary success story. You know, 150 million years does seem like quite a long time, but I need I need something to measure against. How long have humans been on it? Modern humans, so that's us in our current form, is about 200,000 years. Okay. Probably not going to match the beat there, record then, are we? No, not even close. They were around for 150 million years, which means that the T-Rex, the big iconic T-Rex is close to us in time than the T-Rex was to the Stegosaurus. How about that? That's, that is an excellent dinosaur fact, is that your favorite dinosaur fact? It is one of many. Well, good for you. Now, dinosaurs rise to fame, really got going. In 1842. This was the year the scientist, Richard Owen, published his report on British fossil reptiles. Noticing some striking similarities between recently found giant fossils in the south of England, he concluded they should be defined as... A distinctive tribe or suborder of Saurian reptiles, for which I would propose the name of dinosauria. Of this tribe, the principal and best established are the Megalosaurus, the Hyliosaurus, and the Iguanodon, the gigantic crocodile lizards of the dry land. It wasn't long before he was drafted, helped with the great exhibition, a glamourous showcase of global science and industry, organized by Prince Albert in 1851. Right, and Owen was asked to create a sculpture park surrounding a crystal palace, with giant models of his dinosauria built from iron and concrete. The opening celebrations included a near-seave banquet, held within the belly of a half finished iguanodon, and that was when dinosaurs really hit the big time. The whole world converged on London, and dinosaurs were introduced to the masses. This was really the start of dynomania, if you will. So this was the first time that the public really got to see what dinosaurs looked like. Right, and these sculptures are still there in Crystal Palace Park today, which is just around the corner from where I live. So in terms of how these dinosaurs look, what did they get it right? So the concept of dinosaurs has changed over time. We now realize more than anything that a lot of dinosaurs were even bigger than we used to think they were. If you go to Crystal Palace today and look at those sculptures, they do look like something out of a monster film. They don't really look like the way that dinosaurs are portrayed in, say, Jurassic Park or walking with dinosaurs. So why is estimating size so important when it comes to dinosaurs? Body size tells us a lot about animals. It's probably the one single measure of an animal that you would want to know if you want to study that animal. And that's because body size relates to so many other aspects of biology and behavior, with the area that an individual or a species lives in, with lifespan, with growth rate, with the number of offspring, with metabolism. All of those things correlate so strongly with body size. So if we're able to determine the body sizes of, say, dinosaurs, that can give us insight into some of the things that we can't always get really easily just from looking at bones. Okay, so size is important even for dinosaurs. And I started my hunt for the tiniest dino at the Natural History Museum in South Kensington with paleontogist Suzy Madement. Suzy, you just led us through a secret doorway into, I mean, well, how would you describe it? It's sort of like a storm. With all of these cupboards, which presumably are full of all sorts of amazing dinosaur stuff. They are, and we're writing the sub-basement of the museum. We have to store the dinosaurs down here because they're the biggest and the heaviest. So they need to be right at the bottom of the building so they don't collapse down on everything else. Okay. What is the tiniest dinosaur that you have in your collection? This is actually quite a difficult question. It's much less straightforward than you might expect. And I think the first thing we need to think about is, you know, how do we define size? So are we talking about length? Are we talking about height at the shoulders? Body mass? And it's a bit debatable. I've picked one, which I think is really, really small, which I can show you. Yes, please. Let's open this cup up here. I'm going to have to have a bit of a rummage about. I just have to find the nice one I want to show you. Here we go. Here it is. It's beautiful. So this is a dinosaur called Luzutusaurus, and it's one of the most primitive, the earliest dinosaurs. And it's in this little cardboard box. Okay. To the untrained eye. Yes. I would walk past that on a beach and not notice that it was anything special. But looking closely, you can see these little teeth. Yeah. So we're looking at the skull. And then we've got this part here is the eye socket. When it was fully grown, what sort of a size would it have been? I think it would have been the size of a kind of middle-sized dog. A sort of cork-a-span. A cork-a-span, or something like that. Yeah. So all of the first dinosaurs were two-legged. So it had four arms that it would have used for grasping food. So often when you see these two-legged dinosaurs, they're displayed as typos, you know, with their hands facing downwards, but actually they weren't. They couldn't do that with their hands. They were clappers. Their hands facing downwards. And they probably had, you know, relatively long back legs, a long muscular tail, and probably relatively small heads. I'm imagining sort of a crustacean, a cork-a-span, or a kangaroo that's scaling. Yeah. I think that's probably fair. Right. So important technical classification of four arm anatomy there. Not typos and clappers. Yeah. I can't imagine there was much cool for a typist in the upper triassic. Probably not. But this clapping dinosaur, Lesotosaurus, was very small. And the fact that it was small meant that it could escape from its big, nasty predators. All right. So your clappy-ru, cork-a-span, your hybrid might be a touch on the small side, but it is nowhere near the smallest dinosaur ever discovered. I asked you, Brusati, from Edinburgh University. Some of the smallest dinosaurs are things that aren't quite so famous as brachiosaurus and brontosaurus. Dinosaurs like Epidexyptorix and Parva cursor and Frutidenes, the sort of dinosaurs you don't see in Jurassic Park. This one Epidexyptorix was maybe the smallest of all. And this was only about a foot long and it only would have weighed probably somewhere around 100 to 200 grams. Wow. So that is like a medium sized bird, something like a thrush? Yep. Something like a thrush, something like a pigeon, a crow kind of somewhere in that size range. So something that you could keep as a pet. If you were around back then and you were so inclined, you probably wouldn't want to do it because most of these smallest dinosaurs were pharopod dinosaurs. Those are the meat eating dinosaurs. So they were probably nasty, feisty little creatures. Epidexyptorix is one of the coolest new dinosaurs I would say. It was only found about a decade ago. And it's one of many new dinosaur species that have been found in China. There were these ancient volcanoes that would bury entire ecosystems and preserve these dinosaurs going about their everyday business, kind of like a prehistoric Pompeii and Epidexyptorix is one of those dinosaurs. And it looks like it had some kind of a wing. And it probably could have flown at least in some capacity. Maybe it couldn't fly exactly like modern birds. Maybe it was more of a glider. But it could probably move around a little bit in the era. Okay, I'm looking at a picture of this now. How'd you say that? Epidexyptorix. Okay. It looks kind of grumpy. He's got little sharp teeth, big claws and he's got four enormous colorful tail feathers poking up back. Yeah, we think those are sexually selected for display, kind of like a peacock's tail. I have to admit though, I don't think I would have one of these Episick tocturuses as a pet. Yes, it's one possibly for the exotic pet owners to be honest. But you know, I think that you will find that flippy dexochterist. It's Epidexyptorix. It's not the smallest dinosaur that's ever lived. Epidexyptorix. Whatever. Susan Maiment told me that actually the tiniest dinosaur ever discovered is still alive today. Dinosaurs aren't really extinct. Today's birds, there are 28,000 living species of birds today and they are the direct descendants of the dinosaurs. So in a biological sense, birds are actually dinosaurs. So the smallest dinosaur is probably the smallest birds alive today. Which is? The bee hummingbirds, I believe. How big is the bee hummingbirds? It's about two and a half inches. I think that's why they call it the bee hummingbird because it's like a big bee. I mean, I sort of knew that birds were vaguely related to dinosaurs, but you're sort of claiming that birds are dinosaurs. Yes, they are. Yeah, yeah, they're just the descendants of dinosaurs absolutely. Do modern birds share similar sort of characteristics in their skeleton with other dinosaurs? Yeah, absolutely. And that's how we know that they're evolved from dinosaurs. What kind of things? So things like bones in the wrist that allow them to fold their wings back, structures in the shoulder girdle. So the wishbone of birds is present in the apod dinosaurs and meat eating dinosaurs. And then there's just things like feathers, of course. So we have loads of dinosaurs that were feathered. Now, these tiny avian dinosaurs may not be as big as the scary famous ones you see on Jurassic Park, but sometimes being small has its advantages and they were eventually victorious over their gigantic rivals because they were the ones you managed to survive the meteoric apocalypse that struck 66 million years ago. The only dinosaurs that made it through were a few species of really small dinosaur like these ones you could hold in your hand that were covered in feathers that had wings that had beaks that could fly. And these were ancestors of modern birds. And they were the only ones that survived the extinction. If they didn't, we wouldn't have birds with us today. They were just a weird type of small dinosaur that evolved the ability to fly. And that was probably one of their superpowers that allowed them to escape the devastation of that asteroid impact when all the other dinosaurs died. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to the tiniest dinosaur, can we say K-Solve? Yes, Dr. Fry, there are a few contenders including Epidexipterics. However, the smallest is still with us today, the Behoming Bird. Being light and able to fly was one of the things that helped avian dinosaurs escape the apocalypse. And these creatures evolved into the birds that we see today. Think about that when you tuck into a roast chicken. So, Epidexipter, it's said after me. Epidexipterics. You know every time that we record an f-third. I mean, it started slowly, but now it's just, it's just, basically Michelle has spelled out stuff phonetically. And even when she spells out phonetically, I really struggle. I'm really struggle. So, I think there was someone's name in the last episode that we recorded that I had to retake about 16 times. Yeah, and also there was Lesothosaurus, which I think is quite difficult to say. Yeah, it looks like Leo the Saurus. It doesn't. It does, if you don't actually look at the letters and the words that are written on the page very generously by Michelle. Anyway, that, that, that, so love dinosaurs. And I think, you know, for many biologists, this is the way we get into science in the first place. Yeah, I love dinosaurs and I was a kid. I got to give the Natural History Museum, though, in behind the scenes in Natural History Museum. You don't realise there's just room after room after room of just these dinosaur bones. There was like this massive dinosaur bone about, I would say, three quarters of the height of me, just lying on the floor. Just walked past it, just an enormous, enormous thigh bone. They keep, they keep a lot of the type specimens, which are the specimens of a particular species, which is the one from which all of the others are compared. And there was a time when I was backstage at the, at the Natural History Museum a couple of years ago. And I tripped over the type specimen of a porpoise, which felt really bad about, like, did you break it? No, I definitely for the record, if any of the Natural History Museum's lawyers are listening, I definitely didn't break it, and that didn't happen either. So you seriously said that actually, you're not a proper paleontologist until you've smashed at least one extremely valuable dinosaur bone. Blimey. Yeah. Well, I haven't done that. No, big O, you're not a proper paleontologist. Now, we promised you a couple of extra dinosaur questions, especially for you lot. The Curios are podcast listeners. We sure did. Now, first up, we've got one from Dax, Mikkelsen, who lives in Idaho in the US, who asks, how did long neck dinosaurs breed? It's like breathing through a long-gone hose, the Karma dioxide builds up inside, because you don't fully exchange all the air. I want to know what Dax, Mikkelsen, is doing, trying to breathe through a garden hose. And how come they know so much about this? They know all about breathing through garden hoses. Not as much, they, as Seesie Maaman, from the Natural History Museum. Well, that's a really good question, and we know that birds and crocodiles are the closest living relatives to the dinosaur. So if we look at what they were doing, then that gives us some idea about what the dinosaurs were doing as well. So we know that crocodiles and birds actually don't breathe like us mammals at all. When we breathe, we breathe in, and then we breathe out, and our exhale goes out the same way that our inhale goes. But crocodiles and birds have a completely different form of respiration, and they have unidirectional airflow around their lungs. So they have lots of, well, particularly, the birds have lots of air sacs within their lungs, and the air is pushed from sack to sack, and moves around, and is much more efficient because you have gas exchange occurring, both on the inhalation and the exhalation. So birds and crocodiles actually have a really efficient form of breathing, much more efficient than us as mammals, and it seems very likely that the dinosaurs also had that same unidirectional breathing. And in the sauropod dinosaurs, in the long neck dinosaurs, they have all sorts of gaps in their vertebrae, in their neck vertebrae, which we think were filled with air sacs, probably to lighten the skeleton, but they may well also have been used in this unidirectional breathing. So it's not like having two lungs in the center of your body, you've got lots of sort of mini lungs, if you like. They have the two lungs. Well, yeah, they have the two lungs as well, but then these lungs sort of have outgrowth that invade all the way up the neck, yeah. Brontches or something. Yeah, absolutely. And then it goes in one way, yeah, are all the way around, and then comes out. So the main in-out tube is the same. The air goes into the lungs, and then it's pushed out with every inhale and exhale, it's pushed into a different air sac, and then eventually out. So that as the fresh air is moved around, the gas exchange can take place. Several stages. Almost like checkpoints as it goes along. Exactly, yes. I did not know that. I did not know any of that. It's interesting, isn't it? Yeah, amazing. I wonder if giraffe's doing the same thing. I reckon they do. I knew you were going to have that. They do. I think they do. What? They don't have little sacs all the way down their next, do they? I mean, it was two weeks ago. I don't know. But you're a giraffe expert. Hannah, what about the giraffes? What about them? Yeah. I heard that giraffes have got the same number of bones in their necks as humans, is that true? That is correct. Well, well. They're just massive. So is there anything apart from the breathing thing? Is there anything different about giraffe's necks than human necks? Well, they're much longer, and they're kind of stripy. They're not stripy. Spotty. God, that's poor giraffe. Did you know that the Greek word and until about the 19th century, the word for giraffe was camel-eopard, because they thought it looked a bit like camel with a long neck. Of course it does. And it has spots like a leopard. Smart. See what they did there? Yeah, it comes from the, say what you see, school of... Should we go back to dinosaurs, maybe? Yes, you've got a dinosaur question, too. Yes. So I put another one of the Curio's questions to Steve Brissarty, our dinosaur expert from Edinburgh University. Second question, from the pod. Nancy Anderson asks, what do you think would have happened to mammals if the meaty oil hadn't wiped out the dinosaurs? Well, Nancy, I think neither you nor me nor Adam nor anybody would be here. I think this was one terrible day where the entire history of the world changed in an instant. If that asteroid happened to just miss the Earth, I think the dinosaurs would have gone on prospering. They had been around for over 150 million years. When the asteroid hit, that is when T-Rex was alive. Try Saratops was there to see it. The big duck-billed dinosaurs, the big armor dinosaurs that looked like tanks. A lot of the big long neck dinosaurs, they were all there on that day the asteroid hit. And if it didn't hit, I think they would have just sailed right on through. And a lot of them would probably still be alive today. And because of that, mammals probably would have never gotten their opportunity. The first mammals evolved with the first dinosaurs over 220 million years ago. But whereas dinosaurs started to get big, and some of them stayed small, as we've learned about, mammals only stayed small. None of them got bigger than a badger. For the next 150 some million years, you had no mammals bigger than a badger. They were living in the shadow of the dinosaurs. The dinosaurs were keeping mammals down. There was something about the big size of the dinosaurs that wouldn't allow mammals to get bigger. And then immediately after the asteroid hits within a few hundred thousand years, which is nothing in terms of Earth history, we start seeing mammals that are the size of cows, that are the size of giraffes. We start seeing mammals that are burrowing, mammals that are eating plants, mammals that are living in trees. So it was the death of the dinosaurs that allowed mammals to finally break free of their shackles and to diversify. And some of those first mammals living after the dinosaurs died, were these small, kind of puppy dog-sized creatures with long arms and legs. They would be able to swing from the tree branches. Things like Torrahonia is the name of one of them. These were the very first primates. They were our ancestors and they would have never gotten their opportunity if T-Rex and Triceratops didn't clear off. There's a couple of other mysteries within that the Chicksalabhiti right hitting 66 million years ago. Things like, do we have a better idea of why the crocodilians survived? Who are reptiles? They're roughly the same size as a lot of the dinosaurs, but they have remained largely unchanged for all of that time and weren't wiped out. And also some of the big sea creatures. We see the end of the mosaures and placeasaws are gone, but some of the bigger sharks remain from that time. So there's still quite a lot to work out, isn't there? There is. And it's really important to work this out. This is where we get down to why fossils and why dinosaurs and why geology and paleontology are so relevant. Because what happened 66 million years ago was a period of sudden and intense environmental change. And some things were able to deal with that and were able to survive. And others were not. And they died out. And we want to know why? What separates the winners and the losers? And how quickly did it take things to recover? That's very relevant to the modern world as we're struggling with climate and environmental change that is happening today. So there are some interesting patterns. Crocodiles and turtles, they were not affected very much at all by the asteroid impact, whereas dinosaurs, except for some birds, were. And it looks like that has to do with the sorts of ecosystems and food chains that these animals were part of. So dinosaurs were fairly big animals that were living on land. Their food chains were based on plants. And then you had meeting dinosaurs, eating those. And that's how the food web was built. But when that asteroid hit and you had all this stuff shoot up into the atmosphere and block out the sun, photosynthesis would have been impossible or very difficult for at least a few years. And so plants died in mass. And that meant that those ecosystems that relied on plants, they collapsed like a house of carts. Crocodiles and turtles on the other hand, they were not land-living animals. They were kind of semi-aquatic animals. They were part of food chains, not based on plants, but based on what we called detritus, based on decomposing matter that was being flushed into these streams. So in fact, they would have had even more food when the asteroid hit. And it looks like that's the big difference between winners and losers. Now the other question we can get at is why did all the dinosaurs die except for some birds? And the interesting thing there is that a lot of birds also died too. It was only one type of bird that survived. Small birds that could fly really fast, that grew really fast, and had lost all of their teeth and replaced those teeth with a beak. And that beak would have allowed them to eat seeds. And seeds are something that last a long time. If there's a forest fire, the whole forest might be wiped away, but seeds will still remain in the soil. There are nutritional nuggets that can last for a while. So that might be one of the reasons why those birds were able to survive. They were able to wait out all the chaos. But these are things that we're just starting to get grip on. There still are a lot of big mysteries about what happened in the ocean. And we don't have all the answers yet. And that makes it really exciting because that means there's a lot of new things for the next generation of paleontologists to learn. Loads there. I mean, some of the great mysteries of this whole field are that this giant meteorite crashes into just off the coast of what is now Mexico, 66 million years ago. And over the course of very short period of time, almost all of the dinosaurs wiped out. The smaller ones. How quickly were they wiped out? That's a very good question. And there are examples of some large dinosaurs that are thousands of years after that event. So you would have had immediately, like, total destruction and total death of everything in a large area. It was about six kilometers wide. But then the repercussions are much more significant because it would have thrown up a dust cloud which would have blotted out the sky for hundreds of years. And so you get the death of all the big dinosaurs, all the T-rexes and those sort of iconic ones. You get the death of a lot of marine reptiles, but similar sized things like crocodiles and turtles. They seem to be fine. They're fine. They're happy. Yeah. So talking about alligators and crocodiles, we actually have another question that came in from Jude Kirkham from Vancouver in Canada. And she said, I can absolutely appreciate how birds are dinosaurs. However, surely alligators and crocodiles count too, right? It seems odd that no aquatic dinosaurs would survive. That is an important point because if you're counting harming birds as dinosaurs aren't crocodiles dinosaurs. No, they're not. And in fact, they come from a different evolutionary route. So they're much they are reptiles. So reptiles come before dinosaurs. And in fact, some creatures like the Dimetradon, which look a bit like dinosaurs, are actually not dinosaurs, but they're early reptiles. And crocodiles come off from a branch that is pre-dinosaur. Also important, dinosaurs were always terrestrial by definition. So there are no aquatic dinosaurs. Those are marine reptiles from a similar period. In the same way that the terror soles like the terrestrial and the rampart. Thank you for laughing your wing action here. They are also not dinosaurs. They are winged reptiles from, you know, the Jurassic and the and the Cretaceous. Okay, we'll take your word for it. You look so unappreciative of my nerd facts then. No, no, I love you. I do love your nerd facts. You know more about dinosaurs than I expected? It's a wasted childhood. I'm afraid. Yes. Wow. It was a joyful experience for you. You see how my face lights up when we talk about dinosaurs, but this is why any of us do this kind of stuff. Now, speaking of joy, it's time for Curio of the Week. Fast and curious occasion, the least curious, totaling machine. Rather than a prize, Curio of the Week. Right, Sarah Hoxley wrote in to say, thought you might like to know if you don't already that there's a place in New Zealand called Curio Bear. Amazing. So she said she found out on a postcard from her boyfriend's brother who was traveling out there. He went to Curio Bay and swam with a world's rarest breed of dolphin, which is Hector's dolphin. We've got dolphins in Curio Bay. Not just any old dolphin, they're Hector's dolphin. That pleases me greatly. So, okay, if we do have any New Zealand Curios, send us a photo. We do. We know we have some because we had a question from a Kiwi guy called Bart Jensen, a few series ago. So we definitely remember. I don't know. It's just stuck in my head. Yes. So if you're a Kiwi Curio, we want a picture of Curio Bear. Yeah, we do. Or actually, I mean, let's not be exclusive here. If you're not from New Zealand and are traveling to New Zealand, that will also count. That will suffice. We should get them to do something they fun while they're on Kiwi Bear. Yeah. And in fact, they could listen to all nine series on Roots. That would take them from about from Heathrow to about Paris. And then they have to listen to them all again. And again. Yes. And again. Right. So that's our Curio of the week. It's either Sarah Hoxley who wrote in, or her boyfriend, or her boyfriend's brother, or the postcard, or possibly it's the dolphin whose name is Hector apparently. Now, next week, we actually have two podcasts out at once. That's, you know, upwards of 40 minutes of just wonderful stuff floating into your rear drums. Yeah. Well, one of the episodes will be about what is the sharpest thing. And the other is going to be how we know how old the universe is. Enjoy. Hello, all you curious people. I'm Jim Akeleli. And I just want to remind you that all the scientists or these curious cases don't just exist to answer your questions. They're people. They have lives too. For the past seven years, I've made it my business to find out about the life scientific. What makes someone want to become a world authority on fungi sex or quantum gravity? And of cross examined many of the experts on these curious cases. So if you want to find out who these people are and what they do, you might like to give the life scientific podcast a listen. See what you think.
