I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC We are back! We are. It's been a long, long time. I know. I feel like we haven't done a series for ages. I feel like I'm back in the room with an old, annoying friend. You managed to have a baby in the time that we've been off. I don't know. I just think you're annoying. How does that... I'm just ignoring it. How does that work out for you? You know what? It's very nice to be back with full lung capacity again. That's the main difference that I'm listening. Good for you having two lungs. Two lungs. But yes, new human life and new facial hair for you. I grew a human, you grew a beard. And in many ways, I feel like those two things are equivalent. Do you remember in the very first episode we ever did? I confess that I had some ginger in my beard. Do you remember? And I didn't shave for a couple of days in order to demonstrate this. So now that you do have a proper beard, one of the very first things that I noticed was that there's maybe a smattering of salt and pepper. Yeah, a smattering is fair. But very little ginger. But it's there. Covered over by blackness. Which is a metaphor for my soul. Anyway, series 14. This is just a special bonus teaser because the first pod is going to drop on the 25th of October. We've got some excellent episodes coming up for you in this series. One on anti-matar, one on whether you have face blindness, which may or may not have been sent in by an extremely famous person. And another one in which Atom gets his own back from series after series of me inflicting pain and damage on him. It is true. The question is, why do we enjoy being scared? And the demonstrations involved? Turns out I do not enjoy being scared. Not that much. No. I would like to apologise in advance for just how wimpy I am certain the recording. Well, I'd like to apologise in advance because the things I made you go through. Basically, Atom makes me watch a very horrible scary film, which I did not handle with grace or dignity. But let's not forget that in an earlier series you made me watch that terrible film about the dog who's owner died with Richard Geren. Richard Geren is, and it was nothing but pain for me. But anyway, anyway, we've got lots of treats coming up for you. But we thought we'd give you a little treat now because something Atom and I often do when questions come into your case is try and persuade Michelle to let us shoehorn in a collection of science studies that we've been collecting over the years, really. Science papers that we really enjoy, science papers that we think are particularly important. Science papers like... Yes. Now, I thought it was best maybe I should just say the title of this one. Yeah, I think it's yeah. Exactly, let's do it. So this is by Metin Ehran Etaul, and it's from October this year. And the title is, Experimental replication shows knives manufactured from frozen human feces do not work. I mean, there is a lot going on in that title. A lot. And every one of it scientifically valid. Yeah, I just want to say again, experimental replication, which is a cornerstone of science, of course, replication and experiment, shows how knives, well, interesting subject, we've talked about knives on this program before, manufactured from frozen human feces do not work. I felt like I skipped over a couple of key aspects of that. Let me just give you some background here. I'm just going to read the abstracts in fact, because I think it's important that the curios are exposed to real scientific published here reviewed work. The ethnographic account of an inuit man, manufacturing a knife from his own frozen feces to butcher and disarticulate a dog, has permeated both the academic literature and popular culture. See, if I was reviewing this paper, I would contest that. I feel like this hasn't permeated my culture. I never come across the idea of a man pilling into ice and then using it to open up a dog. Well, apparently it has. I just must have missed that seminar at college. To evaluate the validity of this claim, we tested the basis of that account via experimental archaeology. Experimental archaeology, really serious. Totally, it's a field. It's a field. You take ideas from archaeological or our own prehistory or history and you test them to see if that works. Well, turns out though, scientists aren't limiting themselves to stabbing things with their own frozen poo. There are a whole wealth of amazing science studies that certainly on the surface seem quite mad. My particular favourite, Sildena Phil, accelerates re-entrainment of circadian rhythms after advancing light schedules. Do you know what that means? Not really. They gave Viagra to a bunch of hamsters to see if it helped with their jet lag. I know what you're thinking. How'd you give jet lag to our hamsters? Step one. Well, why would you? Turn lights on and off, particular intervals, till the hamsters were used to it. And then they switched the times and hamsters that didn't have Viagra took much longer to become accustomed to the new schedule than Hamsters that did have Viagra. Important stuff, Adam. Important stuff. It's the background to this study which I find intriguing. How do you get to the points where you think, we've been testing all these drugs on the hamsters to see how their jet lag works. We're just going through the alphabet. We've done paracetamol. We've done aspirin. Well, aspirin start with aspirin. To be fair, it sort of does make sense, because the effective Viagra is to increase blood flow. So, you know, you tired. I mean, whatever. Not bulgis. There are lots of these. Viagra has quite a specific effect. I don't think it's to do with tiredness. Here's another one that I particularly enjoyed. Now, this has some context for the programme. We often get sent questions about flatus. By flatus, you mean farts? I do mean farts. That flatus is the scientific word, fartier submissions. And when we have this discussion, out of the three of us, that's you, me, and Michelle, or a producer. It tends to be, and I know the curiotes won't believe me when I say this, but it tends to be me who vetoes doing farts on curious cases. Yeah. I think, well, to be honest, I think most of us, it's a subject you have to handle carefully to get a sensible output, which apparently this group of scientists managed. Yes, the paper is called Snake's Defensive Farts. It's by an Australian team and published in a proper journal. Again, I'll just read it out. When threatened, many snakes produce clear warning sounds. Some hiss, others rattle. But places Sonoran choral snake in the same situation and the best it can do is fart. Chloacal popping is how the, is the correct scientific term for it, the Chloacas being the effluent cavity of a snake and many reptiles and birds. Is it the noise that's supposed to drive the predators away or the smell? Yes, each pop, I'll just refer to the paper itself, each pop lasts less than two tenths of a second, maybe repeated several times, and can be heard from up to two meters away. The pop sounds very much like a human fart, although slightly higher in pitch. Amazing. Yeah. It's great tactic. I think humans can deploy this tactic as a defensive mechanism, too. If you really want an intruder to go away, you know, it's a strategy worth considering. The Sonoran choral snake produces fairly consistent, evenly spaced pops of low amplitude, about 50 decibels and limited range and frequency, 442 to 5,520 hertz. It's important to get scientific details into these studies. And the thing about these papers, often on the surface, they seem like they're quite silly, but they are nonetheless adding to the canon of human knowledge. Quite right. One of my particular favourites, which I wrote about quite recently, was where a group of researchers took a subject, placed them in an FMRI scanner, and then showed them a range of human expressions. So they tested for 8,064 brain sites, and showed a reaction in 16 of those sites. Amazing, amazing study. Only slight twist in all of this is that the subject itself was a four-pound Atlantic salmon, which was, I quote, not alive at the time of the scanning. That's amazing. If only there was a simpler word for saying not alive, do we have that? They chucked a dead fish in an FMRI scanner and then recorded it, looking at human faces. But it got a positive result, right? And that says something incredible about the methods that we use to scan people's brains. I mean, you know more about this than I do. I mean, that's quite an important and famous study for the fact that it was a dead fish that were showing all these positive signals. And more it says something about the way we interpret brain scanning, and we're going to be talking about brain scanning in the antimatter episode, because these are very complex techniques, which are actually based on statistical inferences. And they're not as the press often report that bit of your brain lights up when you're looking at this particular thing, showing that there is a center of your brain, which does this particular thing. In fact, it takes months and months of calculations after the person, or in this case, the fish. Dead fish. Dead fish. It sits in the scanner before you get a result. And they're probabilistic interpretations. Yeah. What was the answer to the fish? It's not the case of like, it's not deterministic, right? It's not like you get a positive result in that area. It's definitely positive. There's a whole load of uncertainty. So if you test enough site, in this case over 8,000, it's inevitable that you're going to get some false positives, right? Some bits that are lighting up when, in reality, they're not. The whole study was designed to really highlight that. How, unless you hand on uncertainty with care, then you can end up getting things that are definitely wrong, looking like they're scientifically valid. If only we had a mathematician to help us navigate this complex statistical world of spurious results. If only. If only. You know who else we should also have on this team? Tell me. A chicken. Why? Because, and I quote from the journal, Human Nature 2002, chickens prefer beautiful humans. OK, I've got a lot of questions. Yeah. How? I'm just going to go straight to my default, so I think we should read from the abstract. Now, this is from Stockholm University. We trained chickens to react to an average human female face, but not to an average male face. In a subsequent test, the animals showed preference for faces consistent with human sexual preferences obtained from university students. This suggests that human preferences arise from general properties of nervous systems, rather than from face-specific adaptions. Oh God. This is just an excuse for the researchers to get a load of pictures of beautiful women and pretend they were doing science. Many questions here. I think this might qualify as science that I would possibly challenge in a longer format. I suspect this might be a highly culturally specific chicken. I imagine it might be. Yeah. What year was this? 2002. I wonder whether this one stands up to the modern lens of 2019. Yes. Anyway, these are just some of our favorite seemingly silly science studies, which don't make it into the programme for reasons that perhaps you now understand. I mean, let's be honest, Michelle's right. She's right. She's right. Tell us not about that. The scrutiny that goes into selecting what's what's topics we choose and what research we use is, is very high, but we should get a chicken though. Can we get a chicken? It would just be generally fun. And also, you know, if we get hungry, I'm vegetarian. Oh, yeah, that's true. But anyway, if you have ever come across any science papers that you think fit into this category of slightly amusing, but maybe not worthy of a whole programme. Then please do let us know. You can email us as always, curious cases at BBC.co.uk and we will feature them in a podcast. And of course, that is email address to send in anything which you think might qualify for the extraordinarily prestigious Curie of the Week badge honour. In my book, it goes in reverse order. In reverse order. At the bottom is Nighthead. Yep. One step up, Oscar. Nice. One up from that. Nobel Prize, followed by Fields Metal, followed by Curie of the Week. I think that's, I think that is an accurate hierarchy. In a sense, far fewer people have got Curie of the Week than they have got Nobel Prizes. Exactly. What more proof do you want? What we really need is a Venn diagram where someone who is a Nobel Prize winner also gets Curie of the Week. Do we know any Nobel Prize winners? I know one, yeah. I know a couple. There's a lot of chin scratching going on. Having a beard. Lofting. Really helps. Anyway, that's probably enough. We've done sexy chickens. Pooh knives. Farty snakes. Farty snakes. Saving vanger to hamsters. None of these things will be in the new series of the Curious cases of Rutherford and Fry which is going to drop on the 25th of October. Enjoy.
