I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello, Curios. Episode 4, series 11. Now, I think we need to change that jingle because I'm getting bored with hearing myself going, science. Is that science? It's just not an attractive sound, is it? Time for change. I think so. Let's try and bend the shell here. For series 12. You know, and if she doesn't agree, we'll just record it ourselves and then slip in the darkened tools of the BBC in the middle of the night and swap over the tapes. Have you got any idea any of this equipment works? No. No, I mean either. That's not going to happen, is it? It's probably just going to stick the same one. Yeah. Now, today is, today's episode is totally random. It's totally random. It is literally about randomness. Yeah. So this is a maths one. This is for you. It is a maths one. Hooray. Hooray. I'm very excited. As you will learn throughout the course of this episode, enjoy. We've randomly selected today's question from all the emails you've sent to curious cases at BBC.co.uk. Well, that's clearly not true. Actually, if you understand how randomness works, OK, Mathmo, let's find out shall we? So a couple of curious podcast listeners, otherwise known as the Curios, sent us two random questions from opposite ends of the pond, Jim Renny from Mac and all Illinois and Darren Spalding from Market Harbor in Leicestershire. Let's tackle Darren's question first. He asks, is anything truly random or is everything predetermined? I totally knew you were going to say that. Now, I spoke to mathematician Colver Ronny Dugal from the University of St Andrews in Scotland. And she told me that this is a question that has perplexed the greatest thinkers in the world all the way back to the ancient Greeks. Democracy is probably most famous for his atomic theory of matter, believing that everything is made up of tiny little atoms, thought that the entire universe was a clockwork universe and that therefore there was no such thing as randomness, things that appear to be random to us are only because we live in a state of incomplete knowledge. Later on, Epicurus claimed that the universe wasn't clockwork and randomness was built into the fabric of the world around us. Fast forward two thousand years and this random debate is still raging. Enter French scholar Pierre Simon Marquis de Laplace. Laplace posed the concept of a demon that could know at some point in time the position and direction of every single piece of the known universe. And he positive that if this demon could know all of that data, then the demon would know exactly what was going to happen in the universe forever more because he would be able to use Newtonian physics to predict everything. In some ways, this is strangely similar to the democracy back in the fifth century BC saying that there was no randomness in the universe and that the entire thing is clockwork. And this prefigures the idea of determinism is he's describing that everything is predictable in the universe. Absolutely. Yes. So I mean, Demochis was there with at fifth century BC. The Christians obviously spent some time wondering about whether God could know everything and hence there could be no such thing as a random event because God would know in a fact that it was going to happen. And so this question of whether there really could be such a thing as chance was a thorny topic and still is on some level. OK, but surely there are some things that are really, really down to chance. Like, I don't know, throwing dice. I can't tell before I throw it how it's going to land. So if I knew when you were about to throw a die exactly how your hand was and exactly at what the lost to you were going to let the die fall and exactly how heavy the die was and all that kind of thing, then I could in theory predict how it would land when it hit the table. But in practice, I couldn't possibly have that much information about the situation. So the throwing of a die is effectively random, even though it's governed purely by Newtonian physics. And so actually is deterministic. So in theory, you can predict the outcome of a dice roll if you've got enough information. And a couple of years ago, there was a group of scientists who published in the journal K.R. So who tried to do exactly that? So they took into account all kinds of things like the viscosity of the air, the friction of the table, the acceleration of the dice. And they showed that if you had a very, very skilled dice thrower, they would be able to predict the outcome. So maybe time for a curious case is field trip to Vegas. Not sure they let us measure the air viscosity of the casinos somehow. But there are many areas in life where we really do rely on randomness and unpredictability, especially when it comes to random numbers as technology journalists Bill Thompson explains. If we think about randomized control trials in medicine, we think about choosing samples for polls for statistical sampling and of course in simulations. If we want to simulate population growth or the spreads of epidemics, we need to put some inputs into the system. And those inputs need to be random. Otherwise, we're basically already anticipating the output by putting in data we know. And then we can't be sure that the results we get are actually scientifically valid. Today, the most common place where people will encounter the need for randomness is actually when they're using the worldwide web for things like a banking transaction. Every time you see HTTPS, the little S at the end in a web address, that means you're using cryptography. And that relies on generating random numbers in order to keep your data secret. So we absolutely need good sources of random numbers in order to make it impossible for people to interfere with the information you're sending over the internet. Sounds sensible. But actually, this poses a huge problem, one that was brought up by our second random questioner, Jim Renny from Illinois. If a computer can only do what someone tells it to, he asks, then how can it pick a random number? The major problem we have with computers and random numbers is that computers don't do random very well. They are predictable, they're designed to be predictable. And the best you can achieve within a computer is what we call pseudo-randomness. Where you have a complicated seed number that is supposed to be unpredictable, and then an algorithm which takes that seed and generates from it numbers which are supposed to be random. The problem is if you repeat the seed and repeat the algorithm, you'll get the same pattern of numbers out. And that means for some purposes, like cryptography, it does allow, interception, it does allow them to be predicted. The solution has been to try to bring in some environmental randomness into your computer. So the way you do it is by making sure that the numbers that seed the formal predictable computing process are themselves random, and therefore the numbers you get out of it can be used. The ways in which this has done range from the sensible to the slightly ridiculous you might say, but perhaps the strangest is lava-rand, which takes one of these lava lamps which you may be familiar with where you have gloops of oil that are illuminated in garish colours. And it uses those gloops of oil to generate the numbers by having a camera pointed at a lava lamp counting them to introduce the right amount of entropy in order to make what comes out of your random number generator a usable number. Hey wow man, this all sounds really psychedelic. Maybe we should put on some Hendrix and break out the justice. Yeah, maybe later. Well, great idea this is though. You can imagine it's a delightful addition to any office. And lava-rand is actually still in use. There's a tech firm in San Francisco that has got a display of 80 lava lamps inside the lobby being monitored by cameras. And they provide the backup security for websites like Uber and Fitbit. And the idea is that if you're producing your random numbers by monitoring those lava lamp blobs, the whole system should be harder to hack. Right. So how do you know if something is random then? Ah, well true randomness looks different. So if for uniform randomness, for example, you would expect all of the numbers from naught to nine to be equally likely to crop up. And if you took pairs of numbers, every combination should occur with exactly the same frequency. So this is a very, very particular signature that is very difficult to fake. Right. So you're saying that randomness is predictable. You mathematicians, you can't even let randomness be random. Well, you know, it's too important to leave this stuff to chance. Okay. So apart from lobbies filled with hippie lava lamps, is there anything we know of that is really truly random? Well, glad you asked, because my favourite random project was a very famous machine called Ernie. The great day of the big draw and Mr. Ernest Marple's, Postmaster General, starts up. Well, here goes. I'm now going to press the switch. The electronic random number indicating equipment, Ernie, to you then got very busy. In 1956, the UK Government launched premium bonds, a new kind of lottery-come investment programme. World War II code breaker Tommy Flowers was drafted into design Ernie, a machine to generate a set of random numbers used to pick the winners. Here is a very 1950s public information film on the whole process. Well, here's Ernie. He's very impressive. How does he work? Glass tube, a rare gas in it, a little electric current, particles go bang, bang, bang, bitter patter on a metal plate. And it's those bitter patter on a metal plate that produce the number. Do you know what? I think that's a 1950s version of Curious Cases there. Good day and welcome to Curious Cases with me, Dr. Rutherford. Now, me and Dr. Rutherford, and I, well, the original Ernie Nabilong, the Science Museum in London, until he blight, their principal curator, told me about the random nature of Ernie's insides. Ernie runs using neon gas diodes, and when you pass electricity through that, the electrons get very excited. They move around in a whole bunch of random ways, and then they hit a metal plate. And when they do that, you know, a random thing has happened, and that enables a counter to take a random pulse. They even placed these neon diodes on springs to make sure that no vibration or anything could influence Ernie. So this was a machine using belt and braces to really make sure that it absolutely was random. They even took one random number away from another random number, just in case one of those numbers hadn't been random, to make sure that the final number would be random. Now, a very important point, Dr., is Ernie perfectly impartial? Yes, absolutely. No one can wangle Ernie, no one can cook the result. It's like here, the little particles back in the middle of the table. Let's have them. Ernie has spoken. And the other live oystered Ernie head. So Ernie relies on what's called quantum randomness, the kind of random movement that occurs at subatomic levels. And it's here at the tiny scales we can measure that true randomness lies. According to the physicist, broadcaster, and all round quantum king, Jim Alkalili. The mechanics describes a subatomic world that is random, that is unpredictable. It's fuzzy. I think it was realized very early on, the beginning of the 20th century, that there was something missing in our description of the world or the very small, the world of atoms that were just being discovered at that time by people like Ernest Rutherford. They were behaving in a way that could not be described by the existing theories, Newtonian mechanics. So what is it about the behavior of these subatomic particles that is really random and genuinely unpredictable? So we talk about atoms being in two places at once or a particle not really having a definite location. But it's also more than that. You can't predict an advance, for example, when a radioactive atom is going to decay, when it's going to spit out an alpha particle. That's not because the theory is incomplete or because of our cumbersome instruments. There really is that randomness, what we call indeterminacy, at the heart of the subatomic world. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to whether anything is truly random, can we say, K-Soul? Yes, Dr. Rutherford. Lots of things we think of as a random, like rolling dice, can be predicted with enough information. We rely on random numbers in clinical trials, in political polls and cyber security, but computers can only produce pseudo-random numbers. If you want something that's truly random, go subatomic, where quantum particles behave completely unpredictably. Unlike the timely and inevitable end of this programme, which happens now. Except that it doesn't, of course, for our career listeners, we had a lot of fun. We lied to her. These voices that we really want to do them the whole time now. You know, what I find really extraordinary about the entire thing is how garlic or the women's handled. Yes, we've got to have a very gentle... ...and gentle. ...because your mind is filled with things like kittens and cellar patterns and cross stitches and complex, it's like robots and numbers. That is the domain of the man. Let me explain this numbers to you. Well, thank you, darling, but I'd rather be able to get back to make your dinner. Oh, thank goodness we live now. And not then. That was fun, though. I enjoyed that, because that was maths that I really couldn't get my head around, but you just was sailing. Yeah, but you know, I sort of think there is still this really, you know, unanswered question, which is that even the quantum randomness stuff, maybe it's just the limits of our understanding. So here's something that I know this has come up before, and I'm very trusting of the process because I do believe that the scientific method works and we need to understand things. But when I put shuffle on my iPod, it cannot be random. Oh, well, you're right. So actually, when the iPod originally came out, they did have proper true randomness on their shuffle feature. But the slight problem with true randomness is that even if something has a very, very small chance of happening, like, for example, your Justin Bieber album playing in the exact correct order. But you know me so well. I've had a lot of niquefick at your iPods. Or, you know, all of your queens hit playing in chronological order, that kind of thing. Even if there's a teeny, teeny tiny probability of it happening, the fact that you had so many millions of people listening to their iPods so often, those kind of seemingly coincidental things happened all the time. So those people wrote into Apple and said, hey, this isn't random. So they changed it to make it so that it was random, but it would force those non-random feeling things to not happen. So it's not random? So the coincidences that happened as a result of randomness were being forced to not happen so that we didn't think that they weren't random? Exactly. People are weird. But I think this is true in sort of everyday life as well, right? You know, you get on a train and you're on the same train carriage as someone you haven't seen for ages, and you're like, oh my god, such a small world, so random. But think about how many train carriages you've been in in your life. Right. How many people do you know? Here's one. This is completely nuts. I, as you know, have just come back from a nice long holiday that was mostly in the southwest of France. Lovely tan. Thank you very much. Where I mostly consumed my own body weight in cheese and baguette on a daily basis. It's in like, so. Right. And then a couple of days ago, I drove from the southwest, stopped off in Shatra. So a long day, six hour drive, get to Shatra, check into the hotel. We walk up to the beautiful cathedral, medieval cathedral, have a look around, sit down in a restaurant next to the cathedral to eat some steak, fruit, and some onion soup. I heard an English voice behind me. This is so ridiculous. It was Mo Bacchaya, who is the commissioning editor of Radio 4. He's our boss. Basically. Basically our boss. He's the bloat who runs, he runs much, you know, about half of the content in Radio 4, he's a bloat could give us the green lights back whether we can have another series or not. Oh, my goodness. Yeah. Yeah. No, that is random. That's definitely, I can officially tell you. As an expert in this subject, that is definitely random. Yeah. Well, I really want to know though, is, did you play fan pants when you were in Ronde? Oh, well, thanks for asking. No, we did say fan pants for the curious. We'll know in the episode about when Michelle was running, fan pants was the game that I say, I don't know whether I invented it. I feel like I sort of discovered it, that it existed time in memorial before I stumbled upon it. We did have a message from Brenna Hassett, who's an archaeologist at Natural History Museum. One of the trailblazers who an excellent team of archaeologists, female archaeologists. Good name, isn't it? Yeah, yeah, they're brilliant. And she wrote in to suggest that the origin of fan pants dates to ancient Egypt where flat bread was used, I think she's making it. I want to believe that it's true though. I want to believe this is a long tradition. Yes. Anyway, but fan pants is the game where in a hotel room that has a ceiling fan, you select a pair of underpants, can be any type. A lot of people wrote in to ask whether there were different types of panties. Panties, even panties. Exactly, boxes, undercrackers, wife-fronts. Undercrackers, I don't even know where that is. Me neither. And you toss them up to the rotating fan, which in a successful attempt will catch the edge of one of the pants for about 180 degrees and then release it, flinging it into the corner or against a wall or one time on holiday in New Yorker out of the window, which my son still talks about. We were proposing this as a new Olympic sport. And I maintain that that is a campaign that very much needs to be launched. Well, the problem was we were staying in a house which had no fans. They had air conditioning. Oh, the modern world. I know it's ruining our chances of playing fan pants. Listen to the curious. We need to get you out there in your legions. We need you playing fan pants whenever you see a ceiling fan. Curios, send us your fan pants videos. Now we've been beginning of this season. Make sure the pants are clean. Obviously. Make sure the pants are clean. Do we need to put terms and conditions on this? We do. I... Very important. And make sure that you play it safely and don't harm anyone in the process of playing fan pants. Keep it clean, curious. Right. Now, the beginning of the series 11, we had a double bill on alien life. And we had a very interesting and important feedback email concerning potential factual corrections. We don't like getting things wrong. We do not. It's important. It's just as profusely whenever we do. Exactly. Now, this email came in from Ruby at 12 and it says, in your alien enterprise part one podcast, you were talking about the wrong end of a cow. Now, this was your story, wasn't it? You were talking to Monica Grady about R.T. cows and 40 cows. Ruby at well goes on to say, unlike us, cows are our remnants with four stomachs and they process food in a completely different way. This means that the cow contribution to global methane is mostly belches and not farts. Monica Grady can be forgiven this mistake since she's a space scientist, but you two should know better. Well, let me tell you one thing, Curios. We endeavor to get things correct on this show and we will stop at nothing if we believe an error has occurred. And so we called up, Radio 4's, farming today, presenter Anna Hill, to get to the bottom of this faintest whiff of a problem. Well, she's right. Yes. She is right. She is belching rather than, can I say the word farts? Yes, of course. Yes, it is belching, mostly belching, yes, that causes the problem with methane. Cattle produce methane as a natural part of their digestion. She's absolutely right. When they eat grass, microbes in their digestive system break it down to extract the nutrients and one of the byproducts is methane. Why doesn't it come out of their bums then? It's just the stage at which it's produced and they have so many stomachs that I think by the time it gets down to the other end, they do excrete methane at the other end as well. And in fact, one of the problems with methane is that it is also contained in their don as well. So if you have a huge pile of cattle don sitting around, that doesn't make methane as well. So yes, it is in their farts as well, but actually the majority of it comes out as a belch. Well, there you go. I mean, no one suggests that we don't take our science seriously. I mean, it genuinely is a big problem that methane production, especially in industrially farmed cows, makes a significant contribution to the warming. So Anna told me that actually one cow alone can produce between 70 and 120 kilograms of methane every year. And given that methane is not the heaviest stuff, that equates to around about 200 cubic meters of methane per cow per year. This is actually quite an astonishing problem. Giving globally the amount of cows that exist on earth, and it's worse as a greenhouse gas than common dioxide as well. So what is the solution? Well, Anna says that actually if you feed cow seaweed, you can reduce their burps by 90%. How about that? It's serious, it's serious, but then. I eat a lot of seaweed. Do you do burp in my face quite a lot? Let's move on. So on the subject of cow burps, we did have this correspondence from the excellently named Dr. Marcus Badger on Twitter. Oh, he's one of the best Dr. Badger. That's one of the best. Oh, that's so good. I know someone called Dr. Jolly. That's pretty good. Not bad. Actually, I once met someone called Sherry Boosa. That's amazing. But I think Dr. Badger might win. His Twitter handle is at climate Badger. And his bio says, organic geochemist, paleoclimat scientist, lecture and earth sciences at the open university. So he knows his stuff. He knows his eggs. He knows his badges. Now, he agreed that most of the methane CH4 comes out of the top end rather than the bottom end of a cow and said, quote, it's a bit outside my expertise. I do CH4 from wetlands more than 15 million years ago. I've got just love science. I love how specific that is. It's one of the top experts in methane secretion by bio from biological means says it's a bit outside my expertise, Phil, because really I only deal with methane. It's 50 million years ago. From wetlands as well. But he goes on. This paper seems to make that assumption. And he centers the paper, which is from the Journal of Dairy Science. And the title is Comparison of Methods to Determine Methane Emissions from Dairy Cows in Farm Conditions by P. Hutton and Etal. Now one of the things about this paper, probably the most memorable thing about this paper, is a series of photographs detailing the experiments that this group of scientists is clearly done. The best way I can describe it is that they have got the cuddly head of a pantomime cow. And they seem to have stuck it on the end of a broomstick rigged it up to various instruments. And as far as I can tell, they're like shoving it into a sink and getting it to burp. There's pretty much, let me just read you a section from the abstract here, because it wasn't just a model pantomime cow in this clearly very important study. So in the first method, brackets, the sniffer method, CH4 and carbon dioxide concentrations of... It's probably methane, right? Yeah, concentrations of measuring close proximity to the muzzle of the animal. In the laboratory study, a model cow head was built that emitted at a constant rate. Anyway, it's proper science. But the key thing is, it does have a fake cow ass head on a broom. And then they shove it in. They're shoving it into a fake feeding trend, making it do fake burps. Yeah. This is proper science. It's absolutely amazing. It's proper science, incredibly important study. Anyway, it is for this reason that we have decided to make Dr. Marcus Badger our Curial of the Week. Forced, thank you, Mr. Cajun Lee's, baby, he's totally cheeky for the philanthropist, Curial of the Week. Thank you to Oliver Law, a five. God, that's just glorious. Okay. When he attends, like, 15, his dad's going to be like, hey, do you remember that tiny, eat that really cute jingle for rather than a fry? And he's going to be like, get off there, just wear embarrassing. That's my random. That's my random dad. He'll be a dairy farming scientist by them. We have our way. So that's it for this week. Next week, our producer Michelle Martin. She wasn't particularly happy about us making her run. So she has come up with an idea to get her own back in an episode devoted to pain. See if you can guess what happens. See you next week. This is the BBC. Hello, I'm Antonio Quirk and I'm the presenter of the film program on Radio 4. I'm Caitlin Bennett, and I'm Antonio's lovable idiot sidekick. I'm on Radio 4 every Thursday afternoon, talking to the most interesting people working in and around film. And then afterwards, there's always something exclusive to the podcast, anything from the work of Derek German to the overwhelming cultural importance of Mumma Mia and its sequels. Take a listen on Radio 4 on the BBC Radio website and all year round as a podcast. Just like in the movie. Our whole archive is there. Dig around. See what we find.
