I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC Number three in series... Fourteen. Four... No, it's more than that. I think it's series fourteen. Is it? I mean, it's like birthdays, isn't it? You just stop counting after ten. It's not my experience. Well, it's series fourteen and it's episode three. And this is a super, super special one because we've got our first celebrity curio question. So the thing is, yeah, when you work on a podcast like this, it's quite easy to forget that people listen to it. And sometimes those people are great heroes of ours. Like, for instance, Adam did a gig the other day with Bill Bryson. And Bill Bryson introduced himself to Adam as a curio. I know. It was amazing. Honestly, it's exactly that sensation where you just go, why are you... Why are you listening to that? That's not... You should be writing best-selling books. Anyway, it was pretty much the same situation here. We don't have to tease who the celebrity is. No, because you've seen it already on the podcast title. The podcast title. For the broadcast version, we teased it and introduced it, which you'll hear that in a minute. But it was Stephen Fry. And what had happened was we were sitting down at lunch at a book festival and the organizer sat him down next to me and said, could you entertain Stephen for the next hour or so? Because he's only just arrived and I went, okay. Did Stephen have any part in this? Because I doubt it. I doubt it. If he could have chosen anyone at the hay festival to entertain him, I think he probably had gone for Michelle Obama. Right. Michelle was busy. But he sat down and it did... This happened in which we started talking about his pro-Sahpegnozia and the neurotic question to ask him. Yeah. And here is the result. During which you will enjoy the episodes generally. But you'll also notice the best missed pun opportunity of all time. Adam and I now kicking ourselves having recorded this episode that we didn't use the phrase, barracobama. You'll see why. It's a curious case of mistaken identity in today's episode. Made even more confusing as the question has come from someone called, Fry. Excellent. All the best people are called Fry. Quite so. Here's the question from the Fry in question. Dear Rutherford and Fry. Hang on there, Stephen Fry. Quite so. All my life, I've been mildly plagued by the fact that I have a quite appalling ability to remember faces or disabilities to remember them. I cut people I should know well dead in the street. Oops, sorry, I didn't recognize you can seem insulting. At a party I can talk to someone for 10 minutes and then see them again 20 later and have no idea who they are. It's distressing for me in as much as I hate the idea that people might think I'm blanking them or think little of them. I'd be very grateful if my sister in surname and her Eximia's partner Adam could investigate prosopagnosia for me and offer any hint as to its cause or even possible. I won't say cure, at least any interesting ways of relieving it. Yours, etc. Stephen Fry. That is amazing. I am so impressed that we got an email in from Stephen Fry. But mostly I'm left just wondering what Eximia means. No idea at all. Stephen popped into the studio so I could accumulate more evidence on his perplexing problem. You and I have met on I think four occasions. I promised you I wouldn't recognize you. When I picked you up from reception a few minutes ago, the first thing you said was have you grown a bit? Yes, last time. Was that because you remembered that I didn't have a bit last time or because you were using it as an identifying feature this time? It was really more creepy than that because I didn't actually recognize your face. I was hoping that by saying had grown a bit, that that would be an excuse for not recognizing. But as soon as you open your mouth, I know your voice because I listen to this program and I've heard you on other programs and so it's distinctive voice. Even though I understand the problem at a clinical level, I still feel slightly hurt by that. When did you become aware of it as an actual name syndrome? So when I started to do say, Jeaves and Worcester with you, Laurie, in the 80s, I was still new to the idea of a film set. So you're quite nervous. The cameraman and the others introduced themselves and I realized that I knew all their names. But if the cameraman, the operator wasn't sitting on his strange little seat on the camera, on the dolly, but was standing in the coffee queue, I would blank him over and say, oh, and who are you? What do you do? And he goes, this is Tom. He just been talking to me. Oh, and he would look at me as if I was completely insane. I suppose though in film world, it might have the opposite effect if you were talking to a mega famous star. And you also got to Tom Cruise or Brad Pitt and say, and what do you do? Oh, goodness, yes. Oh, I've been on airplanes with my husband and someone comes up and chats away and I go, she seems a nice woman. It was a little stirrer me and I was going to his patro. Oh, so, oh yes, oh gosh, for so it was, oh dear, it was just terrible. Is it really that bad? Are you sure he wasn't just using this as an excuse to go out of a conversation with Gwenda Peltchon? Well, we've all been there, haven't we? Have you? No. Hmm, you know what though, it must be even harder for people like Steven, where everyone recognises him whether they really know him or not. Right, and he has to try and work out whether he really does know them or if they're just being super friendly. Okay, well let's try and get some science on this. I called on neuroscientists, Sophie Scott, and started by asking about the scientific definition of face blindness. It's called prosopagnosia and that just means that lack of ability to process faces, as you say, literally a blindness to whose face you're looking at. Very broadly, there seem to be two ways of ending up with this problem. And the classic example is it happens after a stroke or some kind of brain damage and that's what all the original papers were written about. More recently, it's become clear that some people have it who don't seem to have had any kind of brain problem. And when you talk to them, it's clear they've actually had this problem all their lives. So there's clearly a kind of developmental prosopagnosia and an acquired prosopagnosia, but they both leave you with this problem. How does it affect people then? It can be devastating and certainly in the acquired case, with people who've had strokes at least in prosopagnosia, so there's suddenly a change. It can be absolutely devastating for your social life, because people who you've been talking to happily down the pub for years suddenly you don't recognise and they really do think you're being rude. It's very, very difficult. In 1872, neurologist John Hulings Jackson described a man who, following a stroke, couldn't recognize faces and places. Unable to identify his own wife, he'd wandered out of the house and couldn't find his way home. I see your face before me, crowding my every dream. But it took until 1947, before the condition was labelled prosopagnosia, combining the Greek prosopon for face and agnosia, meaning not knowing as in agnostic. The first case study of developmental prosopagnosia where no head injury was present, involved a 12 year old English girl, known only as AB. She was highly intelligent, but disliked going to school, as documented by clinical psychologist Helen McConicky. AB reports that she has never been able to recognise faces, except the most familiar ones. She did not know the doctors at the clinic, even after several visits, and learned to recognise the psychologist by dress. But she couldn't do that at school, because everyone wore the same uniform. AB's mother also claims not to be able to recognise familiar faces. She suggests, as a child, she had less difficulty than her daughter, because she lived in a small community and went to a school where no uniform was worn. Even today, prosopagnosia is not a well-known condition. Brad D'Shaim is one of the world's leading experts, and he says that despite its relative obscurity, face blindness is surprisingly common. When I first got into the late 90s, there had only been three cases published. So we thought it was really rare. So when I first stumbled into somebody with developmental prosopagnosia, I thought, wow, this is going to be a great find for me. This is really exciting. And then I tested him and published a paper about him. But we've realised since then, they're an awful lot of people out there who have difficulties recognising faces. So the best estimate suggests, maybe 1 to 2% of the population has such difficulties recognising faces that it impacts their lives. So there are a lot of people out there. For some people like our curious listener, Steven, it's relatively mild and they can identify close friends and family. But for others, the effects can be startling. There was a woman who contacted us. When people contacted us, one of the questions we ask him is to tell us some examples from their life when they've been unable to recognise faces. And she mentioned that she was going through photographs of a friend of hers. This was a guy that she was romantically interested in. And she noticed a woman kept appearing in these photographs. And she started getting jealous because she thought this woman was kind of sexy. And she asked her friend, who is this woman here? And he said, he laughed. And he said, that's you. Well, at least she thought she was good looking and would have been much more awkward if she was very impressed by what she saw. Yeah, yeah. Now in very severe cases, people can have trouble identifying their own parents or even their children. That must be very difficult. But I want to know a bit more about the cause of this condition. What is working differently in post-apagnosic brains that means that they forget faces? Here's Safey Scott again. There is some suggestion that the brain areas that are different in the people with post-apagnosia that is developmental share some similarity with people who have an acquired problem. There's a part of the brain called the fusiform gyros which sort of runs along the bottom of the brain. And it's a very important sort of visual processing area and it's particularly important in processing faces. Right from birth, our brains are geared up to spot and recognize faces, including those of other species. By aselia's three months, babies are starting to narrow down their recognition to the kinds of faces they see most often. One of the things the human brain does is it looks for meaning. So you'll see faces and things because faces really matter to us. Likewise, people who see religious phenomena in things, they're always religious. I don't see the face of Christ in toast because I'm looking for it. It's not meaningful to me in the same way. There is a very famous case by a psychologist called Jane McNeil who studied a patient who had an acquired problem with recognizing faces. So he had acquired post-apagnos, he had I think a stroke. He could still tell his sheep apart, he was a sheep farmer. So he could still recognize faces as long as they were the faces of sheep. And Keen Curios will remember that we have previously covered a question which involved sheep being very good at recognizing faces, particularly if they are President Obama. Okay, so I have another question. When someone has post-apagnosia, is it a pattern recognition thing? Is it that they can't recognize the pattern of someone's face or is it that they just can't store that image against a memory of that person's identity? Well, the answer is that we don't really know. Facial recognition is super complex and it involves a network of brain regions. So it just begins to get a handle on the various ways that it can go wrong. Brad D'Shaen or expert said that there are some people who have perceptual problems. They don't see faces in the same way. Exactly, and they also might struggle to perceive things like age or gender or emotions. But for others, it is more of a memory issue so the blueprint of someone's face isn't being laid down properly. When they see someone again that that person doesn't look familiar. Exactly. Now, as we've heard earlier from the very first case of AB, a familial link was identified, which implies that genes are involved. So I asked Stephen Fry whether any of his relatives face the same kind of obstacle. Any evidence of this being a familial trait? No, actually, I don't think so. That's a good question. Have you got any awareness of what aspect of what is going wrong when you look at someone that you don't recognize? I mean, this is a wild guess. I'm so fascinated with language that the moment someone talks, the whole of my brain is given over to listening and processing the language and parsing it, not just in its syntactical and linguistic way, but in its cultural way and its accent and all the things that delight me about words and that everything else goes into a sort of fuzz. Are there particular tricks that you have of bypassing this problem? Absolutely. It's kind of watch someone's wearing a bit like the sort of cliché detective in the TV show who says, I see you're not married or whatever. And it's like you're a very observant man, Mr. Poro or whatever. So I do look for rings and watches and additional things which stick in the memory. We asked this week's oracles Sophie Scots and Brad Doshane what tactics they've come across that other people with face blindness use. I hear about a lot of different strategies that prosubagnostics use. Some of these are as simple as just say being friendly to most everybody you meet because it's better to act friendly to somebody who you're a stranger to than to fail to respond to somebody who that you're well acquainted with. There's a number of different things you'll hear people say they'll often try and pick some other thing about people and use that. So I can't recognize faces but I can tell glasses apart. I'm going to pay more attention to glasses or characteristic haircuts. Another such a factual stuff you can store about the appearance of people. Some people, you know, cold climate like here in New Hampshire and the winter maybe it's good to look at people's boots because people tend to wear the same boots during cold weather. Well that's going to be useless for recognizing you as I'm given how many pairs of trainers you own. Right well shoe blindness is a completely different condition. Anyhow maybe the focus shouldn't be on what people with face blindness can do to recognize us but what we can do to make life easier for them which I put to Stephen Fry. Well as we wrap up I hope to see you again soonation maybe you can meet Hannah for the first time your your namesake. What can we do to help you that next time we don't have to go through this again. I grew a beard. Yes you did do that. I mean I I mean it is it's Stephen it's Adam it's just that remembering that there is a possibility that I won't remember. Of course I will get of course Adam this time I remember you and you'll never know whether I was making it up. So Dr. Rutherford when it comes to prosopagnosia can we say casal? Well Dr. Fry face blindness can either be acquired after some kind of brain injury or from childhood. Current estimates are that around 1 to 2% of people have lifelong prosopagnosia. Although there is no cure lots of people find ways to get around the problem from focusing on clothing to hairstyle. Or we could all grow a beard. Who are you again? So that was Stephen Fry and prosopagnosia. Things of notes during the writing and recording of that episode. Prosopagnosia is a really difficult word to say. There was a period of about 15 minutes in our writing room where Adam and I were just playing prosopagnosia tennis backwards and forwards between us. Prosopagnosia? Prosopagnosia. We spotted the trick is the you got to you got to hit the the peg. Hit the peg. Yeah and it is well some of the curias might have a sense of this but often you're not great at people's names. What do you mean the curias might have a sense of this? Do they have a sense of this Michelle? No I think I've hidden it very well. I think I have a sense of this. Yes well many people in the room have a sense that if a name that has more than three syllables comes up on the script. Sometimes it takes your couple of goes and that did happen today with Helen McConaughey which I I spelled out phonetically for you in the script and you still had three goes at it. Maybe that's a syndrome. I think it's an agonizia of different words like a word agonizia. Like I do think you know I don't unless I recognise a word I just have no clue. I don't really understand how letters work you know. Do you remember when you called somebody prawn? Pron. Michelle has just reminded us that when we're reading out the script once and I called someone prawn and then said the name correctly it should be said. Pron meaning this is the pronunciation of the name but it's like yes I'll call it psychologist. Pron Helen McConaughey. Look. Oh we do have fun times here. Look I've got other skills okay. Words are not my skills. I am not Stephen Frye. No no well who is? It was such a joy having him in the studio he's he's legendarily brilliant. The line in the script where we say that Pron's agonizia comes from the Greek prosopon face agonizia meaning what was the agonizia bit? No knowing. Oh yeah not knowing as in agnostic. I kind of threw that in because if Stephen's such a word Smith thought we'd better do some ill know them all right okay you know what though I reckon there aren't other agnosias I'm gonna test you. I can see if you can guess what these are okay what would you reckon? Funno agnosia is that's got to be not being able to recognise sounds. Pretty good familiar voices even though the hero can understand the words used. What would you reckon astorognosis is? Astorognosis not recognising stars? No it's strange you know. Can't recognise objects by touch based on its textures either way I imagine that. I'd love to hear from someone who had if any of the curiades have astorognosis and can't recognise objects that'll be super weird. I want it I want to know more about that. Okay last one last one auto you know what we've put the person who can't read words reading the words. What is it? Step one that was a fail. Okay auto top agnosia auto top agnos. Things with top in them tend to refer to specific areas as in topical. Oh yeah so a topical cream is one of the topology. Yeah or topology. Autopology auto means self. So I'm going with inability to recognise your own body parts. You're not bad I think that's actually heterotop agnosia which is patients cannot point at another person's body parts that can point to their own body parts. That's because heteromines other so I was right then so water. No no no auto top agnosia is the inability to orient parts of the body. Oh I don't really understand what that means. It's like like being super clumsy. Can you tell we got this from Wikipedia but half an hour before the recording. Michelle's very good at providing. But I didn't look at them. I got the I got them. So what would you give me out of ten? Two stars. That's not how ten works but I'll take it anyway. When we were prepping for this as well there is a standardized test for pro-op agnosia which is called the Cambridge face memory test and this was devised by pro-op agnosia expert Brad D'Shae. So what you do we all did it. So me and Hannah and Michelle all did this test one weekend and it's online and it's a picture of a bunch of faces which they they show you one face at the beginning and then the test is they show you three faces which are similar and you have to recognise the one that they showed you at the beginning. But as the test goes on they steadily distort the faces more and more. So by the end I mean frankly you're just looking at a haze of dots on the screen that bears some vague resemblance to the original face that you've memorized. That's right. It's very hard. It is hard and it's quite a strange. They all look a bit like Matt Damon. There was like a fat Matt Damon. It was like a chiseled Matt Damon. But basically it's the Cambridge Matt Damon face memory test. I asked Stephen if he done it and I also told him about our results. Have you done the have you done the Cambridge test? No I haven't and I've been meaning to I should. You can do it online. You can. You can and we got some interesting results because Hannah and I both scored well highly in fact. So it declares that anything above 80 is considered good facial recognition skills and anything below 60 is you are at risk of being diagnosable as having your condition. And what was interesting is that Hannah got 82. I got 86 and Michelle our producer 56. Wow 56. It is as well as if he was a radio producer one feels. She's very good at recognizing voices. You can identify me every time I come into the office though. Yeah that was an interesting exchange that we had overall on our WhatsApp group wasn't it? You know what though? It wasn't really recognizing faces this. It was a recognizing white men's faces. What white men Matt Damon's faces? It did take some concentration to identify Matt Damon from different versions of Matt Damon. Yeah imagine how terrible you must feel if you bombed such tests imagine how it would feel if you flunked. Hey Michelle and now imagine how you would feel if you flunked and had access to a world leading expert on the matter well wonder no more because Michelle with the person who designed the test itself Brad the shame on the line Michelle asked him why he designed the test and whether she should be worried. So that's a test I developed quite a while ago I probably started first working on in 2002 or 2003 and there were a couple of commercially available tests to face recognition but they had some pretty significant flaws so I felt like it was important to make a new test and so that that I that test has 72 items it takes about 12 minutes and there are versions online if people are interested in taking them. Well funny you should mention that because all three of us me Hannah and Adam did it the weekend and our scores were very varied. Adam scored the most with 86. Hannah got 82 and I failed miserably by getting 56. How where should we be or me in particular? I don't I it depends on the circumstances you took the test I mean were you able to you really have to focus when you do the test that's a fairly low score but I don't know if you don't have difficulties with face recognition and daily life and I don't think it's anything to worry about. I'll be looking out. We should point out that even though Michelle's score was incredibly low I mean laughably inability low to recognise faces we shouldn't mock her for that. Yeah what were the conditions that you were doing that testing had you recently seen the born films? Did you have a face to have met Damon on your wall as a teen? How do you feel about goodwill hunting? You know I think we're getting quite good impression of Michelle's character across in these episodes. She can't tell where she is in a building. Disasterously so she can't recognise your face but we love her don't we? Now listen you anyone can do this test online but before you email us your results and possibly concerns we need to state absolutely that a low score does not mean that you definitely have face blindness it could be down to the screen you're using how distracted you are not lab conditions how familiar who I'll be in my day man. But if anyone has listened to this and thought flipping Nora I have face blindness and I never knew you can contact a really good organisation who we called up for programme search they're called faceblinduk and the website is faceblind.org.uk on Twitter they're at faceblinduk and they've got loads of useful information on their website. It is important though to remember that everyone has a moment where they don't recognise someone right? Like it happens to all there was one occasion in particular where I was in a club right this was back in the day I'm into a club for a while I was in a club on a night out with some friends and while I was there this woman came up to me and she was like oh my god I'm so great to see you haven't seen for ages great to see I know I do who she was right so I tried to like keep the conversation really generic and just subtly like get bits of information out for her as who she was and eventually I worked out that I must have gone to university with her and she must have been taking theoretical physics right because I took a few theoretical physics classes. Well what generic question leads you to that in a club? I just like what she did in her what she did you like quarks? Is that it? Yeah I used to see you. How'd you feel about the up lepton? I don't know whether that's right or not. Someone who writes in quark etc. Anyway thing is once I worked out that was where I knew her from from a class of theoretical physics I realised there was only really one person I could remember from that class so I started asking her if she like still hung around with them she still knew them and as I was describing them and I was like you know she had like dark hair she was really nice like very chassy went on a lot she used to wear really mad earrings like earrings that were just not cool and as I said that I realised oh god oh that's terrible yeah did she recognise that description? I mean she was a bit but she was a bit put off by the mad earing thing they were mad earrings though in my defend and she probably is listening to this show I listened mad earing girl that went to UCL and did theoretical physics for years back sorry I bet I reckon earrings were super cool and I never went to a club again which is which is the British thing to do in that situation. In case just in case. Has it ever happened to you? No not in the right direction there was one time I was filming a doc and we're out in the street and you know how just the presence of a film crew makes everyone go a bit weird and they you stare at it and it's it's an interesting thing but it was a sort of medium shot I was about 10 feet away from the camera delivering a line down the barrel to the camera and a sort of middle-aged woman she just came up to my face like and stood about six inches from my face and just stood there with this sort of beaming glow smile looking on her face and I spent a long time thinking are you my aunt? because she looked a bit like my aunt and then my ass is she right up in my face exactly that's what I was thinking you know the eat him aren't yes exactly from New Zealand I'm dying I'm it's in him for a while exactly and I thought I'm my brain process was genuinely going oh my god is that die is die here this is why this this woman is behaving super weirdly right in front of me when I'm quite clearly doing something working and it wasn't her and she just went oh camera it's good luck with what you're doing I was like you're not so from then on I vowed to find out where she worked and then just got to a tap on the shoulder and just go in her face the opposite I mean so in if you work in the media it's quite often it happens quite a lot right that that you come up to you don't know whether you met them before or not or they're just being nice to you so there's like that trick that people use right rather than saying nice to meet you you say good to see you right is there you're going to give away the only thing is I imagined the same as you had them very occasionally I will get recognised by people who I don't know what I'm out and about and early on I was doing that often did the same thing as you was like oh maybe I do know you maybe I don't know you but now whenever it happens after one particular incident I always try and play it as cool as I possibly can because of one occasion when I was in a public bathroom and someone came up to me oh hi excuse me and I turned around was like yeah yeah yeah you know me from my BBC 4 documentaries you did that no that was my amazing and it's obvious no like you've got some tissue paper stuck to your shoe amazing amazing actually I just thought of this there is a brilliant Matt Damon story that he tells about this and it was in London when he was filming something possibly one of the balls but he sees it out in a park with his kid and his wife and a man comes up to him with a camera and and and he goes yeah sure yeah no problem and this chap goes would you mind taking a photo of me and my child you had no idea it's Matt Damon Matt Damon's featured quite heavily in this programme and Stephen Fry it's true if anyone's out there who knows Matt Damon we need a question from Matt Damon that is our challenge make it a chain a celebrity chain yeah that would be great okay well he's there's a challenge for serious with him Michelle can you get onto that please could you get Matt Damon get us Matt Damon now like me Matt Damon on the phone right now I have a feeling it might just be time for Curia of the Week and of course thanks to Jeff Perkins for that which is now a classic classic Curia of the Week jingle and but this week it's another musical offering yeah so you might remember quite a while ago now we had an episode on wider birds sing right it was called the Dawn chorus and it was series 10 as it says here on my notes you don't have an insight to feed it memory of every single episode we've ever done I don't know what series it was at the beginning of this programme yeah well anyway I spoke to the very lovely and world renowned birds on expert during the episode Dawn Kruzma see I got his name right yeah nice nice done so in that episode he played us some of his birds song recordings such as one of them birds was a sandhill crane and I talked in the podcast about how this reminded me of old rave tunes certainly did Feats and Blunder and I think was the track I was reminded of I mean sure let's go with that but anyway someone namely the amazing Nick Henham Henham Henham Henham see there it is I mean that's a straightforward name Nick Henham but look there's so many options with letters together anyway Nick Henham he has got his own band called the sky his own and he took both of these ideas and he smushed them together so here is what he wrote he wrote hi Adam Hannah Michelle and all of curious cases that make this show great thank you very much Nick in our good books already I've only recently discovered your show and binge listened and very much looking forward to more curious shenanigans I'm attempting Curie of the Week by remixing the sandhill cranes hope you enjoy all the best Nick all right so get out your glow sticks whistles whatever here it is and now he knows it is territory and the pair started to wedding vigorously her voice is always the higher his always the lower and when you look at it he is quite a bit larger than he is these are the most charismatic creatures just the most vigorous backers for alternating the wet feet That's mostly it. That's just strumming. That's dubstep is it? Sure. You know what makes me happy is the misheld decided to put this particular cure over the week on the end of the only episode that we can be sure that Stephen Fry will definitely listen to. It makes me so happy to imagine Stephen Fry bopping around his living room to some sandhill grains. He fries massively into Skrillex. If there's one thing I know about him, he just loves dubstep. Is dubstep still even a thing? Sure. Is it listening to these days? Anyway, Nick, Hennam or Henham, and I've pronounced it. That is, I mean, it's an absolute shoe in for a cure over the week. Just straight in there, gold badge. I mean, obviously gold badge. Personally, I think you should release that. Do you know what it reminds me of? Little fluffy clouds by the orb, which is a much slower and earlier. You're looking at me, frankly. You don't know what that is, do you? Sure. Because you're too young. It's not because I'm too young. I'm too busy reading maths books. But that sort of, you know, what were the skies like when you were younger? You remember Michelle? Look, Michelle and Bob in the booth are nodding happily now. I mean, I agree with you. I just can't partake in this conversation. You don't remember the lovely guy. I'm really sorry. What were you doing in 1993? Weaving maths books. Weaving maths books. They both just shrugged. I don't know very much about music at them. I have conversations about quarks and clubs. Are we not? Are we not covered as ground? But this is exactly what the background music, too, having conversations about quarks and leptons and clubs should be. So Nick, you've done it. Do you know what next week is all about, though? What is it? Not music, my friend. Delicious, delicious physics. We've got a whole episode on antimatter. Nice. Join us then. And in the meantime, if you have any questions that you would like us to investigate, please send them in to curiouscases at bbc.co.uk. See you next week. Rup. Music Russell Cain here. I'm here to tell you about evil genius, the BBC Radio 4 podcast, where we take icons from history and then decimate them by slinging mud. Think you know everything about Einstein? You're done. He was a woman hater. You probably think you know about Amy Winehouse that she was a victim. She had a pretty dark side and we're not shy about exploring it. Evil genius. We take people from history and a panel of three fellow gestures have to vote at the end of the show. Ifs, no butts, no grey areas, evil or genius. Plus hilarious banner as well. So head to BBC Sounds now and hit subscribe.
