I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. It's a brand new series of curious cases. Yeah, series 11. They've let us back in the studio for the 56 episodes. We can just let ourselves in now. Anytime day or night. It's actually three o'clock in the morning. Yeah, we don't really know how to operate the equipment, but we're recording under stealth. Yeah, doing on my phone, actually. No, that's true. We've got a double episode for you to kick us off with the new series. Yes, we love our double episodes because we get really stuck into subjects that we get super excited about like the hunt for zero was one. Yeah, left-handedness being another. Yes. And now science fiction, fanatic Adam Rutherford. Hello. Something to tickle your taste buds. Cartel, braader, nick-do. And for those of you who don't speak Klingon, this actually was that Klingon? No, it wasn't. And people were writing. Could you direct those? What is it? What is it? What is it? What is it? It's from the day the Earth's still. Oh, God. All right. Whatever. People are normal and don't memorize phrases like that from films from 1901. 51. This double-fz is all about aliens and the search for intelligent life. Welcome, Earthlings, to the new series. Five more curious cases coming up. Now, we have had multiple sightings of this question from around the world, including James Cockolydice from Melbourne in Australia, Henry Quester from Bogota in Columbia. And this message from Mike Holcomb, who made contact from the planet they call logs in Scotland. What are we looking for when we search for alien life? And what are we expecting to find? Now, as a science fiction enthusiast, it might not surprise you to learn that I am seriously into this question. I have spent roughly, whoa, 38 years considering this? Well, I'm not into science fact, but luckily for both of us, we are devoting two full episodes to exploring the universe and probing our celestial neighbours to discover what alien life could look like. And we're starting on our doorstep in the solar system. How was our scientific love affair with ET-born? The search for extraterrestrial intelligence. And he begins at the beginning. You could trace the idea that there really might be some cosmic company out there in a serious way to the invention of the telescope at the beginning of the 1600s when Galileo pointed his little telescope at the sky and saw a little round balls in the sky. Looked at Jupiter and it was a round ball. It wasn't just a point of light as it had been forever up until that point. And the assumption was that these little round balls in the sky were similar to our own familiar round globe teeming with life. When they looked at the moon, right, with these small telescopes, they would see these Mariah as they're called, which of course just means sea. They thought they were looking at oceans on the moon. So they just assumed the moon was kind of like the Earth, and they made the same assumption, I think, when they looked at Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, and William Hershel was looking at Mars back in the late 18th century. In fact, he gave a presentation to the Royal Society in around 1784, in which he was talking about seasons on Mars and the length of the day on Mars, but he could actually measure that. And so he could actually talk to the Royal Society about what a day was like on Mars, except that they quickly recognized that Mars is a smaller world than the Earth, less gravity, so maybe the Martians were on average taller. Martians were tall, but according to philosopher Emmanuel Kant, the nuctions were amorous. He claimed that extraterrestrial intelligence was perfectly proportional to their distance from Sun, from idiotic mercurians to ingenious Saturnians. Space was so packed with alien life that one calculation in 1848 predicted that if the population density matched that of England, the solar system must contain 22 billion inhabitants. But nobody had any concrete evidence, until Italian astronomer Giovanni Scapparelli turned his telescope to Mars in 1877 and noticed faint ochre tracks criss-crossing the surface, which he named Canali, meaning channels. But that caused a bit of a mix-up, according to planetary scientist Monica Grady from the Open University. Unfortunately, the Italian-roared Canali was translated as canals by a later astronomer, Perceval Lohl, and a canal has a very, very different connotation, and so Perceval Lohl thought that there were hosts of aliens on Mars busy digging this network of canals. Excitement about Mars and life flourished, with the French astronomer Camille Flemareon declaring, It is almost certain that the inhabitants of Mars are of a different form to us and fly in its atmosphere. So were the markings that Scapparelli saw on the surface of the red planet really channels of any kind? No, they weren't. I mean, at the time, Shaparelli was using a relatively primitive telescope. What he was saying was just a poorly focused picture of the face of Mars, but we are obsessed with trying to find life on Mars, aren't we? Why is that? I think we're obsessed, because now we know what Mars looks like. We see that Mars must have been more like Earth in the past. The features there, they must have been rivers and lakes. There's some evidence, but it's not completely accepted that there might even have been an ocean on Mars. Now that we know more about it, it does seem to be the sort of place where you could imagine life getting going. Why haven't we found life on Mars yet? Because it's a very difficult thing to look for. You've got to be going to the right place where you think there is going to be the sort of habitat that these organisms would have lived in. Now at the moment, the missions that we've got on Mars, opportunity and curiosity assuming, of course, that both of them have survived the dust storm, they were not specifically designed to look for those traces. They're designed as a very carefully put together program of missions, which has been building up to trying to find evidence for life. So evidence for water was opportunity, evidence for habitability as being curiosity. And the next rover, which will launch in 2020, arriving in February 2021, is going to be collecting rocks that can be brought back to Earth on a subsequent mission where we will be able to look really, really carefully for signs of life. Okay, so over the past couple of centuries, we've basically gone from potentially billions of neighboring aliens to the vague possibility of some really tiny microbes which we might discover if we get really, really lucky. It sounds like it's this point. Actually, I mean, this stuff is hard, right? It's really hard. Yeah, it is. And the way we look at life on Earth is it has to be water-based. So we often be looking for water on Mars. Now just this summer, a subterranean huge lake was discovered at the south pole of Mars. So maybe the odds are changing. There could be Martian fish in it. It unlikely it was extraordinarily salty. But that does bring us to another rather tricky question because if we're talking about life on other planets, well, we do have to ask, well, what is life? And even that is surprisingly tricky to pin down as biologist Matthew Cobb reveals. It's very difficult. There is no generally accepted definition of life, but like art, we know it when we see it. We know it when we see it. But what, there must be some sort of checklist though. If you're a GCSE student or your children or GCSE students, they've probably learning an acronym which goes by the name Mrs. Gren, which is a pretty good starting point for the features that characterize life as we know it, Jim. And I can never remember them. So they say we can do it. So it's movement, respiration, sensitivity, growth, reproduction, excretion, excretion, excretion, and nutrition. Very good. A star at GCSE. Thank you. NASA don't go with the GCSE definition. They have a very Darwinian approach, which I think is right, which says that life is a group of entities that is subject to natural selection because life must be able to reproduce itself. And in reproducing itself, there are errors. Those errors, if they lead to some vague slight difference in success, will eventually lead to evolution by natural selection. Okay, so we've talked about Mars, life, and life on Mars. But what about elsewhere in the solar system? This strange sound has been created from data captured by the Galileo spacecraft as it flew by the Jovian moon Europa, a strange icy world with an oxygen atmosphere. Monica Grady told me that the best place to find life in the solar system may not be on Mars, but distant moons that we know contain water, such as Europa, and Enceladus, a moon of Saturn. This water isn't at the surface. It's below quite a deep crust of ice. And so there must be something under the ice keeping this water liquid. It's thought that the source of the heat is coming from the centre of each body. The heat might be coming out through something like hydrothermal vents on the floors of the oceans. Now we know from our own planet that on our depotion floor, which is very, very dark, very, very cold, there are these hydrothermal vents where superheated water comes through these vents. And there's a chemical reaction goes on. And the chemical reaction releases energy and bacteria dying on that energy. In the same way as bacteria at the surface, dying on the sun's energy. And it might be the same on Europa and Enceladus. Well, that is interesting there because we now are beginning to think that life began in hydrothermal vents on Earth four billion years ago. And when we look today, we find that these environments, which seem pretty hostile, boiling water, free-floating sulfuric acid, are actually teeming with life from bacteria to crustaceans to special worm-y type things. So there might well be Inceladians or Inceladalians. In Caladians? What about ones from Europa? That's Europeans. I think that one might be taken. Let's go with Europeans. So what would Europeans and Inceladalians look like? Well, that's exactly what I asked Matthew Cobb from Manchester University. I can't tell you anything about what simple life looked like, but this is where biologists have to make way to the physicists. What we can say is that if there are large kind of meter scale organisms in the ocean, deep down there in some bizarre ecosystem with quite large things in there, and some of those things need to move quickly either to eat other things or to escape being eaten, then those large meter scale things will look something like a dolphin or a squid or a shark, because all those organisms have the same shape, because if you want to move fast in water, then physics makes you look a particular way. You've got a streamlined shape. So I can predict that with absolute confidence. If they're there and they're that big, they will look back kind of shaped. You're postulating the existence of space squid here. That seems about right. Yeah. So who would win in a battle between space shark and space squid? Probably space squid because they're very clever. So Dr. Rafford, when it comes to the search for alien life in the solar system, can we say case solved? No, we cannot. We are without evidence. The recent discovery of an underground lake at the south pole of Mars fuels hope that we might one day discover signs of Martian life. Further out towards Jupiter and Saturn, the icy worlds of Europa and Enceladus could harbor aquatic organisms possibly fed by hydrothermal vents. But as for intelligent life, well that's a question for our next episode. Until then, stay curious earthlings. There you go, tantalisingly, leading on to episode two where we continue the search for alien life. When search for life gets a bit more intelligent, vaguely. But right now, as ever, as our special podcast listeners, our curious, we have extra content for you. Of course we do. Of course we do. Yeah. So one of the things that we talked about in that episode was what is life, which is a sort of slightly unresolvable question as far as unconcerned. But when you're looking for extra terrestrial life, the question becomes, well, well, what are you actually looking for? How do you know? How do you know? There's all this, it's all very well saying hunting for life on Mars. But what are they actually looking for? Yeah. So the concept is biosegniatures. So what does life actually produce? And one of the things that life produces a lot of is methane. So I had a chat with Monica Grady about methane that is excreted from biological bodies. Now on the earth, methane is produced by rice, by termites and by flattonant gals. Okay. Now the methane goes into the atmosphere where it on earth is oxidized and is removed. But because we have biology, we have this sort of continual resupply of methane into the earth's atmosphere. Methane has been detected in the Martian atmosphere. And the discussion is, is that methane the product of biological activity because it should be removed almost straight away. It shouldn't be there. So it's being replenished. Now there are non-biological ways of producing that methane. It could be methane that was there when Mars was formed that became trapped in ice, which is now gradually being released. It could be the product of breakdown of the rocks as they weather and it being released as a byproduct of that. Or it could of course be heard to flattulent cows living in the caves below the surface. Farty Martian cows. Absolutely. I like that as a scientific theory. I'm getting with that one. Yeah, let no one accuses of being childish about this doctor's fry. Or dumbing down. No. It's dream cutting edge science. That was Monica Grady from the Open University, introducing the concept of extreme important latent cows. Yes, but she did say something important there, which is that it still could be geological. Now I interviewed someone for the next program, mostly for the next program called Sarah Ruggheim from the University of St Andrews and she is an exoplanetary explorer, which means she's looking for planets outside of the solar system. But I asked her what gases she would be looking for when trying to work out if a planet harvests life. Methane on earth, a lot of it's produced by life, but also a lot's produced by volcanoes. Things like oxygen, ozone, that on earth is only produced by life. However, we can very easily imagine other ways to produce it without life, such as breaking apart water into hydrogen and oxygen and the hydrogen escaping. So oxygen alone even isn't a good biosignature, but in combination with methane that gives you the planetary context you need to say that that's very unlikely to be geological. So basically the jury's out. It gases in the atmosphere could be geological, could be biological, we don't know. It's tough, it's tough, it's tough, it is tough. It is tough, but interesting to look. You know what though, there is one alien elephant in the room here and I don't mean an actual alien elephant. I mean, what about Roswell, what about UFOs? You know, you go on the internet, you can see the evidence for yourself. You can, YouTube is absolutely crammed full of evidence. I was doing air quotes when I said evidence there, listeners, dear curious. If you do feel strongly about this, do feel free to email Michelle, I'll lovely producer, Hannah and I. Make sure you put her name in the subject. That's right. So that we know that it gets directly to her, because I know that she's very keen to hear from people about this. Especially on Twitter as well, because that's the sanest form of communication. But more generally though, we asked Chief Alien Hunter, Shostak from SETI, that's a search for extraterrestrial intelligence, what he made of the whole question about UFOs. It's certainly true that I get emails and phone calls every day from somebody who claims that, you know, I don't know why you are, in fact, looking for aliens far away, because they're here, they're visiting Earth and buzzing the skies. That would be extraordinarily interesting, if true. But the evidence isn't very good, it certainly hasn't convinced many scientists, certainly hasn't convinced me. And people send me photos and videos, well, really on a daily basis. And I look at these things, and in many cases I can sort of figure out what's going on. And what's usually going on is a problem with the cameras, actually. Most of the cameras these days are cell phones. But you can usually recognize what it is that has caused this peculiar looking object in the sky that they claim. I think that if we were being visited, you would have thousands of satellites that are monitoring their Earth that would see these things. And the usual response to that is, well, yes, these satellites that are surveying the Earth, they do see these things, but the government keeps that information quiet. Well, I don't buy it. I mean, there are so many governments involved in this. There's so many people on the Earth that can look up at this sky. I just don't believe that all the good evidence would fall into the hands of our government or any other government. And they'd all have to be colluding here. So I honestly think that if we were being visited that, that fact would be patently obvious to us. And it would have been for many, many decades. Maybe they visited and they checked us out and then just decided the Earth was a bit rubbish. They'd leave us alone for a few, till we matured a bit. Potentially, potentially. There's also the chance that given Earth's long history that they would happen to be visiting right now while we're alive. Yes, well, I think it's our technology peaks. Exactly. And it has to coincide with enough of a delay that the technology peaks at the same time that the signal would be received from another. And this is the Fermi paradox. This is the idea that there, well, if there are aliens in the rest of the universe, if the universe is teeming with life, well, where are they? Yeah. You know, Monica Grady, we didn't get to include the clip in this, but I was chatting to her off mic. And she says that, you know, why, why not they visited when, you know, Mars was a lush planet, and Earth was a rock, you know, they could have come along then. Yeah. And just missed us by it. And Ben Nightwell, it looks a bit boring. Well, if you do the sort of geological and lifetime span of, you know, the existence of life on Earth, four billion years for the first two billion years, it's just bacteria in our care. For the next billion, it's just like single-celled organisms floating around in the ocean. You only get complex life, like animals five or six hundred million years ago. And within that, you only get humans, well, 100,000, 200,000 years ago, that's, you only get telecommunications in the last 50. So, timings all this is crucial here. Very true. And you know, it is not so coincidence that that is exactly what we will be talking about in the next episode, the evolution of life from single-celled organisms to having technology and being classed as intelligent. But now, yes, it is time, my friends. It's time. So you've all been waiting for. It's Curio the Week. Of the Week. Yes, it's Curio of the Week. It is Geeksheak. What did he say? Totally Geeksheak. Totally Geeksheak. So we had this amazing email from Melissa Wagner O'Malley from Bradford in Massachusetts. That's not a Boston. We did. But before we get onto this email, let me just tell you, let me just tell you, I'm a person who keeps their promises. And last series, I promised that I would make a Curio of the Week badge. And true to my word, I did indeed go out on my own back and get my friend. Who's a designer? A designer to make them for me. Okay? I did that. That's the kind of kind, decent person I am. Yes. In fact, you delegated the task. You're on holiday when you did it as well. This is all true. And yes, we have those budgets. We've had them delivered. And yet, it turns out, I didn't need to because Melissa Wagner O'Malley is heroic, remarkable. So her email says, Adam, Hannah and Michelle, Alves Glouder, we approve of order on this show. Hannah mentioned our series she wasn't working on. A badge of some kind for us, the Curios. Now, I've been working on one since the series prior. I'm just really planning ahead here. Yes, we love it. And so it was time to send it over for your thoughts. Happy to take suggestions or rework or never to speak of it again. Well, we are speaking about it, because I've got to be honest with you. The one that my friend knocked up in 15 minutes is nowhere near as good as yours. This is much, much better. Now, it should be said that Melissa is also a professional graphic designer. And you can see why on the basis of this. There's so much going on here. There's so much going on, but in an incredibly simple motif. She's got the word Curio, but the eye in Curio is an upside-down question mark. Very clever. Nice. The O is a monocle. Or a magnifying glass. Or a magnifying glass? Yes. And underneath she has a moustache that is half black and half ginger representing our hair colors. I love it so much. It's really good. It's much better than what we did. So let's say we, you did it. Off your own bag. So what are we going to do with this? You've got a batch of badges which are on your design. Which is quite good. I mean, I'm not, you know, I'm not going to slide them off. They're still decent. But Melissa, we commit to making your badges and using those as the Curio of the week official badge. But until then, I've got this massive stash at home. I've got worked really. So we're going to send you one of those. He's gold, though, to be fair. It's gold. All right. So that's the Curio badge update situation. And Melissa, you are Curio of the week just for outstanding planning. Potentially Curio of the year. I'm not going to lie. Oh, that's bold. Yeah. Definitely Curio of the series unless someone comes in in a trumps there. Cool. So you're committing, you're writing checks, your body can't cash there. Just try. I'm just trying to. I don't know what that means. Let's go with it anyway. Anyway, that's episode one, the first part of the hunt for alien life. And we'll be back in about 30 seconds with episode two. If you're listening to chomping through on podcast, yes. This is the BBC. Hello, I'm Antonio Quirk and I'm the presenter of the film program on Radio 4. I'm Caitlin Benedict and I'm Antonio's lovable idiot sidekick. I'm on Radio 4 every Thursday afternoon talking to the most interesting people working in and around film. And then afterwards, there's always something exclusive to the podcast, anything from the work of Derek German to the overwhelming cultural importance of Mama Mia and its sequels. Take a listen on Radio 4 on the BBC Radio website and all year round as a podcast. Just like in the movie. A whole archive is there. Dig around.
