I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello, Curios. Extraordinaryly excited this morning because we've got a really, really super ridiculously special podcast today. We have been allowed else of the cupboard that is our BBC studio. And I've got on an actual plane. Yeah. And travelled to a very special place. Yeah, it's true. It's true. Where it's on. Where it's on. Let's just set the scene here because it's what is it? It's nine o'clock in the morning and we're in the canteen at sunset. So there's the Swiss mountains over there. Smells beautiful. It smells so pure. It smells, it does. It smells like clean fresh, sweet hair. Clean fresh, which air and protons. There are some addrons kicking around. Heady accent. It's so exciting here. And the the cafe is really the hub of this this whole ridiculous 27 kilometer wide circle of physics. Well, yeah, what you need to imagine is that you got all of the physics nerds in the world distilled them down so they were extra physically and extra nerdy and then just filled a building with them. And that's where we are. And when we talk about these people as being nerds, really what we mean is these are our people. Yeah, obviously I don't know. There's a bad thing. It's so so comfortable here. It is like a cathedral to science. They got a joke about Neil's ball on their ping pong table. This is my spirit of your home. I didn't I didn't get that joke, by the way, because this is like maths and physics and stuff, things that I don't really understand. I've been here a couple of times now and CERN is in many ways. It's about 50% 1970s and 80s. Quite drab buildings and 50% proton accelerators that could destroy the universe. It's a nice sort of balance. I think I mean, that's what you want. Yeah, good mix. And also not true. Anyway, on with the show. A mind bending curious case for us to solve on this program, sent in by 12 year old Laina Comeyapeteers from East Sussex. What is the fifth dimension? I know the first is Lent and the second is with third is depth and fourth is time. But no one seems to know what the fifth dimension is. Well, I do. It is a dimension as vast as space, as timeless as infinity somewhere between light and shadow. It is an area we call the twilight zone. Well, actually, Laina, to investigate your question, Adam and I have indeed transcended both time and space, meaning that we jumped on an airplane to Geneva, which is one hour ahead. Yes, and we have come to surely the most time and space bending experiments of all sun. Now, Laina has already helped us out by getting us up to four dimensions. That's up, down this way, that way and time. But how about the fifth dimension? Can we even conceive of such a thing? To begin with, I'm off to speak to Racky Mabubani, a particle physicist working here at sun. Can she help me picture the fifth dimension? Think of a canal that's narrow and long, and you can think of boats of different sizes going through this canal. So if you have a huge cruise liner that sort of fills up the canal, it can only move along the length of the canal. It has no ability to move in the width direction, so from the perspective of that cruise liner, the canal only has one dimension. Now, if instead of a cruise liner, you have a little sailing boat, that sailing boat can also zigzag along the width. So from the perspective of the sailing boat, the canal has two dimensions. If instead you have a submarine, it can also experience both the length and the width, but it can also experience the depth. And from the perspective of the submarine, the canal has three dimensions. So anyone on that cruise liner, I mean, effectively there is only one dimension. They can't conceive of that up and down dimension. Is that sort of analogous to how we are with three dimensions? Exactly. We can't experience it, and we are unlikely to be able to notice. Why do we think there might be more than three spatial dimensions out there? A very compelling reason is that we don't really understand why the force of gravity is so much weaker than the other fundamental forces that we experience. Okay, so if I give you this fridge magnet and this key, try and pick up the key with the magnet, which it does very easily. The magnetic force between this little fridge magnet and the key allows you to overcome the gravitational pull of the earth, which is huge on the key. A tiny little magnet beating the entire earth. Exactly. Yeah, okay. All right, gravity is quite weak then. It is. Yeah. Why does that imply that there might be further dimensions? The hypothesis is that gravity, like the submarine in the canal, can experience additional dimensions that we are not capable of, and it dissipates into the extra dimensions. And so we feel it to be very weak. Is it like being diluted almost? Exactly. Now the concept of extra dimensions may seem futuristic, but the idea has been around for a surprisingly long time. It became popular in the world of mathematics when Bernhardt Reeman proved in 1854 that more than three dimensions could exist in geometry, although he did have a nervous breakdown in the process. Later that century British mathematician and science fiction fan Charles Howard Hinton designed a four-dimensional hypercube called the Tesseract. And alongside science came art and the concept of extra dimensions appeared in works by Oscar Wilde, Muscle Proust and HG Wells and the Tesseract is a big part of the Marvel comics. It even inspired cubist artists like Picasso to try to depict higher dimensions in his painting. But until now nobody has ever been able to prove the extra dimensions actually exist. Now back here at Surn, they're trying to do just that and to test theories we need experiments. And I've come to see what happens when particles collide and meet the physicists trying to uncover this mysterious fifth dimension. I am Dr Sam Harper and I'm a physicist looking for extra dimensions amongst other new physics. Such as extra dimensions. You say that so casually. But first of all, we're in a huge cavernous space. There's lots of work going on in the background, but we're also standing in front of, well what is that? Well that is a picture of the CMS detector and it's life-size. You can see it's a size of a five-story building. CMS is the compact neon solenoid. It's one of the four detectors that the Surn and LHC. This huge object allows us to find the smallest, smallest fundamental particles in the universe. So it's a huge sort of octagonal piece of equipment. People will have seen pictures of this, but that is a picture of it because the real thing is where? It's just under our feet, 100 meters underground. Right now LHC is firing test beams into it. Fire is the rounder that almost the speed of light, 99.99, centre of the speed of light. Highest engines mankind has ever made. Collide them in the CMS detector and they make new particles, new physics and they can allow us to understand the universe that way. And it's protons you're colliding with other protons? Yes. To create what? We don't know what we're creating, but we're hoping there's something new there that we haven't found before. Sam we're at ground level. Can we go and see the detector itself? Unfortunately not. So we're firing highly energetic beams of particles in there right now and this would make your day very bad if it came in contact with you. Bad how come? Well it would hold straight through you and then give you room cancer. It would not be good. Yeah can we put that Michelle on the risk assessment? So we can't go down and see the actual collisions, but we can see where you crunch that data to find what you're looking for. Yes I mean that's our control room. It's very busy right now. A lot of activity in it, all prepping for the collisions we're about to see tomorrow. This is the sound of particles colliding. It's dated from one of the certain detectors that has been turned into sound. As two protons smash together they can create all manner of other particles. If current theory is correct with a tiny probability one of the subatomic particles created in that collision could be something called the graviton. So what is it? Well quantum physics tells us that every force has a related particle that carries it. So light is carried by photons and gravity should theoretically be carried by gravitons. It's just that we've never observed them, but they could be the key to unlocking the hidden dimensions. This is our control room. We've got about six people in here right now busy analyzing their different detectives and a lot of activity because tomorrow is a big day for new collisions. I'm inside this control room with Sam Harper and it's crammed with huge monitors all streaming graphs and data from the detector 100 meters below our feet. Basically it's mission control and there's a team of people primed and ready to start recording what happens when the beams start colliding tomorrow. All determined to capture if they can be elusive graviton. If a graviton is this we can produce it and we can see it decay into two electrons or we can even see it wander off into the action dimension never to be seen again. So we've never seen a graviton before it's a hypothetical particle at the moment. Yes, but the idea is that this is the experiment that will allow us to see one to create one. It's the leading contender. Yes, we're particularly produced I don't know, a three or four of them a year out of hundreds and hundreds and hundreds and millions of events. Okay, okay, so it's a rare event which makes it difficult to find. Yes, it's a very rare process. How long have you been looking? Fourteen years, two countries. Are you confident that this is going to be the year that you do it because you've made that amount of progress? Oh yeah, every year is the year of the graviton. Okay, every year. Okay, how long will you keep looking? Well, I mean, I want to make sure it's either there or it's not. Okay, so in this, the bitter end. So will this be the year of the graviton? Are theoretical physicists like Sean Carroll from Caltech in California are not quite as hopeful? Well, I would say that we're quite sure that gravitons exist. We're not at all sure that they will be discoverable at the large adron collider. In fact, it's quite the opposite. You'd have to get really, really, really super lucky in order to find gravitons at the LHC. The way the gravitons would possibly be detectable is if they interacted much more strongly than we thought at the energies that the large adron collider is able to probe. So theories have been developed in which that's true and therefore we're testing these theories at the accelerator. But if the gravitons were there, we easily could have seen them and we haven't, therefore, I would say the odds are very, very long. I would not bet 50 to one that the gravitons are going to be there. But of course, it's very worthwhile looking for these extra dimensions, because if we were to find them, then everything would change about how we thought about the fundamental rules of nature. That would be an earth shattering discovery. But if you don't see them, that doesn't mean they're not there. It could just mean that your experiments aren't good enough yet. And maybe if we creep up on them, someday we'll hit the jackpot. And if we do someday hit that jackpot and reveal that these long-sought-after extra dimensions do indeed exist, what will they look like? And where have they been hiding? Well, they're everywhere. Those extra dimensions, if they exist. You know, you have to get yourself in the mindset of what a physicist means when they say the word dimension. We tend to think, you know, having seen Doctor Strange in the movie theater, that a dimension is some place you go and it's haunted by weird creatures or something like that. But a dimension is just a direction in space. Around you right now, there are three dimensions, which you could label up, down, left, right, forward, backward. So it doesn't really make sense to say where is the dimension up, down? It's everywhere. So the same thing would be true for the extra dimensions. What we know for sure is that the extra dimensions are hidden from us somehow. So they could be really, really, really small. So small that we'll never see them. That's the easiest way for them to be hidden. There are two other possibilities. One is that they are medium small. So a millimeter or a tenth of a millimeter. Another possibility is that the dimensions are just infinitely big, but we can't get there. That we are stuck in some lower dimensional subspace of the universe, something that physicists sometimes call a brain, which is a sort of weird version of the word membrane. And if that's true, it could be that there are multiple brains, multiple three or four or five dimensional subspaces stacked next to each other parallel to each other. So in that sense, there could be parallel worlds all embedded within these extra dimensions. So Dr. Rathard, when it comes to the fifth dimension, can we say case solve? Well, Dr. Frye experiments that the large Hadron Collider are currently trying to find evidence that extra dimensions exist. This could explain some problematic parts of quantum theory, like why gravity is so pathetically weak. These extra dimensions might be so tiny that we don't even notice that they're there. Also infinitely large that our 3D universe is stuck inside a set of parallel multi-dimensional subspaces. It is the dimension of imagination. It is an area we call the twilight zone. It's not the twilight zone. And there we have it, the first and possibly last time that they'll ever let Asim and I out of this studio and onto a real plane. It's a lovely time there. Oh, he squeezed an amazing trip out of that. It really is just formidable in pre... It was your first time, wasn't it? It was my first time. How does it feel? You know, I think one of the things that I like the most was this idea that actually we could be so massive that we're just not noticing these extra dimensions. We sort of think that oh, maybe we're really tiny, but actually we like these giants kind of clumping around, trolling on all of these tiny little dimensions. Mathematicians feel quite comfortable in talking about things that are impossible to visualize. Yes, I dear Curios did not. I like sort of real concepts that are sort of physical in there. You know, you can almost hold them in your hands to understand them. Well, you can hold this stuff in your hands. I mean, you're probably holding all sorts of dimensions in your hands. Just don't really know because it's such a giant. Yeah, that's another sentence is that I never thought would be directed at me in a professional or personal capacity. Nice. I thank you for that. You know what, they actually talk about mathematicians have been comfortable in thinking about lots of extra dimensions. You know, Charles Howard Hinton that we talked about briefly in the program. He actually, for exactly this purpose, sort of invented the jungle gym. So when he had his kids, he essentially in his garden built a very rudimentary jungle gym from Bamboo. And his aim was to give his children an intuitive understanding of three dimensional space. So what you do is he's standing there and he'd shout out a series of coordinators X, Y and Z. And they'd have to move themselves over to the correct point on the Bamboo jungle gym. And then his son, based on this idea, went off to America and in the 1920s, patented that real metal version that you see in playgrounds. That is, I mean, that is just the, I think that has to be the best thing I've discovered this, this week. So basically, if you've got kids or if you can remember being a kid and going on a climbing frame in a communal path. Use it to teach your children about three dimensional Cartesian coordinates. Yeah, which is exactly what you're thinking of, rather than as we both know you're standing and freezing cold, wishing for this day to end. It's true. I haven't quite got to that point yet. My daughter, but I know it's coming. Anyway, like there was loads we were at sewn for the whole day and they treat us so lovely. It's lovely. It is now. It is. And there was tons of stuff that we recorded that we couldn't include on the program. Now I was, you heard me talking to Sam Harpo's, one of the physicists looking for gravitons and looking for extra dimensions. But before we got to the control room, which is basically like a space shuttle control room. It is true. And just hundreds of large screens with data. There was one person who had nine computer screens at their desk. Nine. I mean, that's unnecessary. Surely some of those are just, you know, superfluous to require. Well, anyway, before before we got to the control room, we had a wonder round in the sort of the nodes where you can get to the actual detectors and we couldn't go down it to see the beam itself. Because if you do that, you're almost certainly dying pretty much instantaneously. But we we recorded a bit of me talking to Sam at point five, which we're going to play now. In one part of the building, which are basically like huge warehouses, we went into a room and we were met with what I can only describe as a massive bloody great hole, which seemed to reach down into the pits of the earth. So this was standing over the whole 100 meters down to the bottom. That's a hundred meter drop. 100 meter drop right down to the bottom. So we're on a viewing platform here and it's like an enormous factory sort of warehouse. There's just a bit in front of us that we can't see the bottom. It's like something from the Death Star. Exactly. And this is actually the small one. This is our service cabin, all the power, all the cooling, all the cryogenics and the gases are all going down those big huge pipes there, you see. Very industrial pipes and all the way down the 100 meters to underground. And what's what's at the bottom of this of this ridiculous hole in the ground? At the bottom of this is our second control room down there, where we have all our tectroelectronics that have to be really close to the detector because we need to read out things very very fast so proximity matters. And then below those on the same level as the LHC this hole leads us to the LHC, which is a hundred meters underground. It's a stolen on the level of engineering required for this. You're a physicist right? Oh yeah, but the engineering is a massive. So fun fact, there's an undergone river going through this as well. So when they dug the hole down they found they were actually had a river flowing across it. So they had to freezer of liquid nitrogen to be able to dig through it. Okay, that is actually ridiculous. So there's an underground river which has been frozen with liquid nitrogen so you can do your physics. Exactly. And the reason we have to do it so far away is we have to be away from all the interference on modern day life. The LHC is an incredibly sensitive piece of equipment. So for example, you can actually see the effects of the moon on the LHC. The gravitational attachment on Lake Geneva deforms the rock slightly, which allows you to see the orbit change. When you say it deforms the rocks slightly, what is the margin of error on slightly there? Oh mini-school, mini-school. I mean you'll never see it at day-to-day basis just to the fact that the earth moves slightly when the lake moves. Our previous collider there was left, large electron positron collider. And that you're also affected by the TGV timetable. The natural train grid. The natural train grid. And being the French trains, it was great. She's due controls because some days they were strike a lot. So you could see if you could see the effect was there or not on the same day. It was fantastic. It's very scientific. It's stormy and shun. You know what? They told me that getting those proton beams to collide kind of nose-to-nose with each other as they line them up is the equivalent of firing two sewing needles across the Atlantic and having them land point-on-point. So just you know a train or not train is enough to just deviate that ever-ever-ever-so-slice. Incredible, incredible engineering, incredible science game on that. It is incredibly impressive. And where better to celebrate that incredible engineering top-level particle physics than by using the music of the rock band Queen? Where are you going with that? Well that's exactly what they do. So Sam Harpel was telling me that they programmed all of their computers to play a whole set of Queen songs depending on what happens during the collider run. No, they have. They do. What's there for an electron? I'm going to test you on this because there are several moments where they have different Queen songs that are relevant to what they're actually doing. So this is really a test of your knowledge of the songs of Queen rather than your knowledge of particle physics. Okay, okay, okay. So when they're initializing the run, okay, so they're trying to start up the first run of collisions. What do they play? Oh goodness. Under pressure. That's good actually. That's not one of the options but that's not bad. I'll give you a clue. Go on. We will rock you. Very good. Next on next on next on next on. We will run you then they're going to start a run and then when the run actually happens, don't stop me now. No, no, it's a good option. Well, it's, do you know the quote by, I'm obviously clerk about the difference between extremely advanced technology and science and indistinguishable from magic. Yes, the song is magic. It's a kind of magic. Oh my god, I'm such an idiot. I can't believe we didn't get it. It's a kind of magic. Now, it's so wonderfully nerd. Yeah, it's music, no, it is one as physics, no, and then the final one. So when this is what Sam said, when we successfully bring key subsystems into the readout system, ready to have them in the run. How do I don't know what that means? I need a door. It doesn't matter. It's a really, really good thing that they've achieved, which only really top quality winners could do. Like champions. Exactly. Like champions. There you go. I love that they do that. I love that they do that. Sam Harper and the people of CMS and the large hatron colluder and the people of the large hatron collider, we salute you. You rock. Yes, indeed. You rock seriously hard. Now, while we were there, although I didn't get to listen to any Queen songs, we did get to do something very, very exciting that in fact, we were just staggeringly fortunate. We happened to be there on a day where the new new Treno detector that is being built known as Protodune had been built and existed physically but hadn't yet been filled with about a gazillion litres of liquid argon. So we managed to black our way inside it. It was like something from a bond film. It was like covering this gold, dappled light. But yeah, just the amount of engineering required. We were inside it. It's amazing. It's just a prototype. It's a colossal machine that we stood inside. So, you know, sort of 10 meters by 10 meters, which is going to be filled with liquid argon. This is just the prototype for a much bigger new Treno detector, same sort of idea. And that's going to be done in the United States and buried 1,300 meters underground. And it's going to have neutrinos fired from Chicago to South Dakota, all just to look for anti-matter. The guy who runs it said they're looking for results probably in the mid-2030s. But we were there for a reason because for your other programme, Adam, the one that you do without me. They allow me to do without you. I tried to get on it all the time. It just won't let me. I'm called Inside Science. You were doing an interview while we were at 10 for that programme. Yes. And that will be on soon. Depending on when you listen to this podcast, maybe it's been the past. It may be, but you can find it on the inside time. It's all through the fifth dimension of time. Truly, truly impressive piece of engineering and visionary science. You know what time is now, though? It's curative the week time. We've got a quick 10th curio of the week, the thick. Now you may remember that in the last series, one of our curios alerted us to the fact, previously unknown to the Curious cases, that there is in fact a Curio Bay in New Zealand. And we received this email from Curio John Pairs. Prompted by listening to a recent episode while traveling through New Zealand, I've checked out the location of Curio Bay and it transpires that I will be within a few miles in the next few days to save the BBC a few Bob. Always good. And to also save Hannah and Adam, the jet lag. Also Rob has offered the opportunity for going. Yes, we're still going to come to Curio Bay in person. Happy to do a wrecky. We're always happy to go. Always happy to go. But it's not rule it out. No, indeed, but John's done it for us. He has sent us in this recording from Curio Bay in New Zealand. We've just picked our way through the Cattlin National Park and arrived at Curio Bay at about one o'clock. Low tide today is at 140 and that's significant because that's when the petrified forest is exposed. Curio Bay is a lovely spot, bright blue skies and a nice day for a picnic, which I'm just about to enjoy. All right. Oh, he's having a picnic as well. Wait a rather end, John. That was, we've actually deployed location reporters now. We're extending our reach. The Curios we are, Borg, we are a network and throwing to our Curio Bay correspondent. That's brilliant, John. Thank you so much for that. It seems that we're really building a base in New Zealand. So let's just nurture that because, well, we basically quite like to go to New Zealand. It's just a shameless attempt to get us to go to New Zealand. Right. And that's all from us this week. See you next week. This is the BBC. Hi there. I'm Claudia Hammond. Now the wonderful Hannah and Adam always have plenty of evidence in their shows while they answer some of life's mysteries. If this is the kind of thing you like, then you might also like all in the mind the BBC podcast I present every week. We cover psychology, mental health and neuroscience. So if you've ever wondered how we humans think and feel and behave and why we sometimes do some strange things, then all in the mind is the podcast for you.
