Welcome back, it's Series 5 of Curious Cases. Nobody thought we'd make it this far. Hannah's holding up her hand with five fingers on it to show the number five. I was hoping you'd five-five me, but okay. There's a big table in the way. Yes, Series 5, we've got another set of five more brilliant curious cases sent in by you. Yes, indeed. You sent them to Curious Gaces at BBC.co.uk. And don't forget, if you have more scientific mysteries that you would like us to investigate, that email address is always open. What? Open? That's not how emails work. You think he likes it? He's a lot of letterbox. I think if like our doors were always open, whatever. Let's move on. Alright, well now this episode, in the continuing theme, this has been another gift giving exercise. What are the gifts that we've had over the years? The gift of singing lessons. Yes, that was good. The gift of an empty box, which I was pretty upset about. And as you've seen in this series, I sought my revenge. Yes, and achieved it. But I guess this episode coming up, there's a lot of difficult words that we have to get our tongue handy. Indeed. Right, we have a lot of pronunciation difficulties on this. Now some of them were genuinely technical words such as different types of bacteria. Accomansier came up, I've got that spoke phonetically on this sheet here. Back to roider teams. Turn that, my arm just love a difficult word, don't they? And also, who is the guy who saw cells for the first time, Dutch draper, 17th century? Let me just say how you actually spell this, because, wait, where is it? It's L-E-E. It's got about 14 A's in it. Oh, don't, where has it gone? Antony Van. Leven hooker. Yeah, that's pretty good at it. No, that's pretty good. Leven hook. Phenetically though. Leven. Phenetically you would go Lou Wen Hoek. I reckon that's not his name. But that wasn't the worst one because when we got to the word, the word which describes our entire microflora in our bodies, which is spelled M-I-C-R-O-B-I-O-M-E, you pronounced it as... Micron V. And then the second time? Microbion V. Sorry, that's not that funny, but it made me laugh. Hey, dude, numbers and equations, not words. Should we crack on with the letters to that? Hello and welcome back to our very curious cases. You dear listeners have sent in Bousilians of mysteries for Dr. Fry and I to ponder. And as we shall reveal in the next five episodes, we have done our utmost to investigate them using the power of science. Yes, keep in coming curious cases at BBC.co.uk. But for now, we begin this series with a gem from Dr. A.J. Mathur all the way from Mumbai. Science tells us that our body's house is microbial organisms. How much of our weight is really our weight? If I'm overweight, is it because of my own body cells or excess microflora? Well, after you're lovely present to me in the last series, Adam, which was an empty box, I have a present here for you. At least find me, not empty. Thank you very much. It says, map my gut testing kits on it. Now, as part of our investigation into all of the little things that live inside us, I thought that we could have a look at the little things that live inside you. Oh, genuinely excited here. I honestly always wanted to know what bacteria inside me. And now is your chance. Off you go. Okay, so I'll do it now. Actually, Adam, I think this is one you should do in private. Okay, so here's my present from hand up. I just open it up. There's some instructions. There's some blue plastic gloves and two sample tubes. It's a stool sample collection kit. It's a very funny instruction. It's how to wipe the toilet down. You put this big sort of flappy V-shaped piece of paper over the loose seat and hang it over the edge and then sit on it. And the kit is still so full. As described in the test instructions. Oh, why do I do these things? Good, I'm sure I'm not the only one who's going to be left to clip there. I thought it was going to be a saliva swab. Really, Adam? Because that's not where most of your bacteria live. Well, I know that now. Look, this is very important science. I will spare you the details. I send off my sample to the lab to be analysed and we'll find out later what's inside my guts. Spoiler alert, it's not that great. I don't know whether I'm regretting giving you this gift already. But let's change the subject, Adam. How about some history? How did we discover that our bodies are home to these microbial residents? 17th century Dutch Draper, Antony Van Livenhook had an unusual hobby. He made his own microscopes the most powerful of the age. He even examined the contents of his own mouth. He removed the white, squidgy plaque from between his teeth, added rainwater, and observed strange things hither too unseen. To my great surprise, the aforementioned matter contained very many small living animals, which moved themselves very extravagantly. Their motion was strong and nimble, and they darted as a pike through the water. In proper scientific fashion, he sampled four further mounds belonging to local volunteers and concluded. The number of these animals in the skurf of a man's teeth are so many that I believe that they exceed the number of men in a kingdom. Since then, we've discovered that these bacteria inhabit our whole bodies from our mouths to our noses all over our skin, basically, we're walking pet traditions. Yes, they exceed the number of men in a kingdom is what Livenhook said. So how much is that? Here's Science writer Edjong, author of the appropriately titled, I contain multitudes. The latest estimates say that there are about 39 trillion bacteria and other microbes in our bodies. We actually have roughly one of their cells for each one of our cells, but because they are much smaller than we are by weight, they're actually quite light. They only come up to about one or two kilograms. These microbes are very drastically across our body. The kinds of bacteria that you find in your mouth are very different to the ones that hang out on our forearms. If you think about the body from a bacterium's point of view, there are different parts of the body have very, very different ecosystems. So my forearm is dry and parched a bit like a desert, whereas my nose is damp and moist, a bit like a rain forest. And just as rain forests and deserts have very different animals and plants living in there, so do my skin and my nose and all the other parts of my body have very different communities of microbes all adapted to those particular habitats. It's worth pointing out that it's talking about everyone there, not just his own weirdly wet nose and dry forearms. The key thing for our health is not the number of bacteria, but the fact that they have tons of genes that are buzzing away inside us. And now Adam, time to find out what's buzzing away inside of you. Yes, I went to St Thomas's Hospital in London to meet Professor Tim Specter, who's one of the founders of the Map My Gut Project. Now, I have provided your lab with my sample and you've analysed it for my gut flora, and I don't know what the results are, but I believe you have them in front of you. We do indeed. Before I start, would you guess what they would be compared to our venture? Are you going to be, I don't know, do you feel a healthy gut type person? We at home are pretty healthy diet, probably not enough vegetables and too much processed meat. I don't need a lot of junk food. I don't know, you're making me nervous. Should I be nervous? I can reveal the results, and you're pretty much near bottom of the class in terms of diversity. Really? Yeah, you're in about the bottom 10% of our population in terms of a snapshot of your gut. Hold on, bottom 10%. Yes, so that's not great, is it? Which means you've got much less species, less richness than the average person by quite a long way. You're dying on the inside. Metaphorically, yes, actually not yet. I had extraordinarily low levels of thermocutes, which are found in vegetarians and vegans, and I had a lot of bactyroidides, which are bound in meat eaters. That'll be all the burgers then. Yes, also unhealthy high levels of a particular type of E. coli. In fact, 211 times more than normal. Now, I think that counts as statistically significant. Yes, I just got back from a work trip. Did I have a bit of a dicky tummy at the time? I think you definitely have a makeover for your rotten gut, Adam. So do I. Tim's back to tell me what I should be eating to try and improve my microbiome? Varieties the key here. So I think what you're going to take home is say, have another look at your diet. Your best bet is to take as many different things as possible. And I'm generally in favour of natural foods rather than probiotic supplements. Most people know about yogurts, but the next stage up, which has five times as many microbes, is kefir. And if you're adventurous, you go from kefir to kombucha. I don't know what either of those things are. Well, this is a whole new world waiting for you. What are they? They're all fermented foods. So kefir is an old Persian, Turkish, soured milk that's live microbes living off the milk. Can bootcher as a fermented tea? Take it as a void of adventure. You can discover whole new things to eat and try something new every week. Mmm, sound milk and fermented tea. It's anti-litter. Yeah, well, we did that interview a month ago. And the truth is that I haven't eaten meat since. And I have had a lot of seaweed and kimchi, which is a South Korean kind of fermented cabbage chili thing. It does smell quite a lot. So my wife makes me keep it in the garden. Probably wise. I'm impressed with you, though, and changes to your diet. And after all, it is really important to look after our bacterial lodges, because we are just beginning to discover the huge influence that these little guys have. Here's Ed Young again. We know that they actually help to protect us from infectious diseases, which might sound weird because we associate microbes with disease. But those in our bodies help to take up space and crowd out other species that might cause us harm. We also know that they help to build our bodies, renew parts of our organs. Perhaps they may even influence our behavior and the way we think. There have been loads of studies and animals now showing that the microbes in their gut can influence aspects of their mood, their personality, maybe their resilience to anxiety or stress. It's still not clear, I think, to what extent those results translate across to humans, to what extent mental illness is influenced by the microbes within us. And I think these are really exciting areas of research. But we still have many more questions than answers. Well, if definitely influenced the way I think, mostly I'm now thinking, oh, I really want to burger. How the yogurt. Yeah, okay. But back to AJ's question, how much do our bacteria contribute to our weight? Well, we know that they only add up to a couple of kilograms. Correct. However, research is starting to show that a microbiome could be influencing our weight very heavily. Tim Specter has studied this by comparing sets of twins, where one was a bit skinnier than the other. When we looked at our twins, we found there were certain microbes that were always present in the skinnier twins and then in the overweight twins. And a couple of the microbes came up consistently. One of them was Christensenella. And that's on my chart. That's on your chart here. Yeah, and you got exactly zero of them. None. None at all. Whereas most people have a few. So when we took it from humans who had quite a lot of it and put it into mice, we could stop those mice gaining weight when we gave them burgers, et cetera. So, right. So once some of that. Yeah. We used to think as microbes, as always bad, you had some nasty one gave you a toxin. It turns out that most of them are good guys. The other good guys are Akamansia, which we tend to see in people who do intermittent fasting and also those that are generally skinny. And you're reading for Akamansia again, exactly zero. See? So you've come out bottom of the class. Oh my lord, that's terrible. So I've got none of the Akamansia and none of the other one with the tricky name. So how do I get hold of some of those good guys? There's two interesting ways to totally change your microbes, if you're keen at them. One is to have bariatric surgery. That's a transplant of your gut. Within 24 hours, it totally changes your gut microbes. So that's one option. It would be pretty extreme for me. Bit extreme and you might get too skinny. The other option is what we technically call a poo transplant. Technically. That's the technical version. Where you take a super donus poo who's very skinny and healthy and been screened for everything. And through various methods, you can have a tube through your nose, up your bottom, or as a tablet form, which we call crapsules, it seems to be nearly as effective as the tube method and might be more palatable depending on how you view it. So I think that's probably the future. We might end up with designer poo capsules. You know that gives me an excellent idea for your next present. No, no, absolutely not. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to the question of whether our bacteria make us overweight, can we say, case salt? Yes, the trillions of microbes in our body only contribute around a couple of kilograms to our weight. But their influence on us is much more weighty. Some people contain multitudes that keep them healthy and slim. And you don't. Thank you for reminding me. Right, well that was yet another humiliation by Hannah on me for the curious cases. But if I can assemble this of seriousness just for a brief second. No, we can't get away from the fact that you're enforcing. I'm going to enforce it. I'm going to enforce it. This is really important. Science is going to have a profound effect on the way we treat various guts, disorders and that type of stuff. Yes, but you still put energy. Well, no, without getting it, we didn't go into details in the program because it goes out a lunchtime. But I know that our dear podcast faithful listeners desperately want to hear the press call. Or can skip if they don't. But it's actually quite cool because what you get, you get this little sheet, this fold out sheet which has sticky tabs on it. And you stick the tabs on the back of the loose seat. And it creates a sort of hammock. Is it like that practical joke that you do on people with cling film? Yes. Yes, it is. That creates a delightful mental image, doesn't it? Well, anyway, it creates this little sort of poo hammock. And then you do it. And then you have to scrape a little bit out with a little spoon. There's a little spoon and I've got the tube here. No, that's not the actual tube. No, of course not, because then I had to give it to Michelle to send it off. Again. I noticed you lied during the episode saying that you sent it off. No, you came in and you handed it to Michelle. I actually handed a stall sample to our producer, Michelle, who's yet again, taking one for the team here. But look, if I had your son screw this, you've got a tube. Oh, it's going to attach to the top. It's got a little shovel. Oh gosh, it is like a little shovel. Just a tiny little shovel attached to the top. When you take a little sample, pop it in, wrap it in ice, send it off to Tim Specter, who does his magic... I'm your poo. My crumbly stuff on it. I think this stuff is fascinating though. I mean, I would actually be quite up for those creptures. I'm not going to lie. You do one. I would, yeah. Yeah, I think I would. I mean, you sort of are eating somebody else's poo. You're supposed to eat it. You can pop it up as a supposite show. No, I think I'd rather just swallow a pill. Wouldn't you do it? Yeah, I definitely would. I'd rather do that than give up burgers. Yeah, I'd miss them that much. Really? It's come out from the pub the other day. It went past a well-known burger chain and was drawn, drooling like Homer Simpson towards it. I think we've learned a bit too much about you in this episode, Adam. And you can find out even more about me in the article. That I've written about my microbiome, my disease to microbiome in BBC Future, the address of which is... BBC.co.uk forward slash future. .com with every single type of five series we get that wrong, both of us. BBC.com slash future. But I do at least know what email address now. And if you do have any other scientific mysteries that you would like us to investigate, please do send them in to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk.
