I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC Hello, Curios. Now, after last week's fantastic Christmas fungal feast... MUSIC Nothing says Christmas like mold. We imagine that you're all sort of mushroomed out now. And... And about to embark on... But why so? ...about to embark on a possibly futile diet. But the thing is, is that, uh, hold on, before you decide what futile diet you're about to embark on, because maybe we have got a Curious Cases diet for you, maybe, just maybe. You can have a little listen. Here's the episode. MUSIC MUSIC Hey, it's a food question today are absolute favourites. Yes, we do love a good food question here on Curious Cases. Not least, because it means that we can cook the food and eat the food. Even better. It's a pizza question. Paul and Manchester wrote two Curious Cases at BBC.co.uk to say, I like pizza a lot. I think it's possible I could eat it every day for the rest of my life, but I also know it's important to have a balanced diet, so I don't. Well, Paul, we acknowledge your desires here and we admire your self-control. Wait, he's not done. Maybe science can help, he goes on. It must be possible to make a pizza that contains my recommended daily intake of everything. Can you tell me what would be on that pizza and how big it would be? Well, Paul, we acknowledge your self-control and we admire your faith in science. Yes, we will make the one pizza to rule them all. We will make a fortune. Not sure about that. You look unconvinced by the Curious Cases total diet plan here, haven't you? I mean, look, okay, I love a slice of American heart just as much as the next person, but come on, Adam, surely there is no way that a pizza could be enough on its own to fulfill your dietary requirements if you want to be healthy. This smells quite a lot like a fat diet to me, and we all know that fat diets never work. History is littered with them. After William the Conqueror finished with the whole battle of Hastings thing, he piled on the pounds. So much so that King Philip of France likened him to a pregnant woman about to give birth. Medieval body-shaming much? Well, quite. So William came up with his own fat diet, where he consumed almost nothing but alcohol. He wanted to lose enough weight to resume riding his cherished horse, but soon after meeting his girl, he landed on the pommel. That's the bubbly bit at the front of the saddle and died. He did lose the weight though. Yes, permanently. Okay, how about this for a fat diet? Wet lips 19th century poet Lord Byron credited his thin, pale, proto-goth look to vinegar and water. This practice re-emerged in the 1950s as the popular apple cider vinegar diet, which instructs people to drink a mixture of equal parts honey and vinegar before each meal to curb cravings and cut fat. Presumably by making you feel sick, literally all of the time. Well, there certainly isn't any other valid scientific explanation. Then of course, there was either vegan in the 17th century, who supposedly survived for more than a decade, or nothing but the scent of flowers. Shall we post that one in the file marked? There's no possible way in hell that that could be true. Yes, I think we possibly can. Okay, enough of your fads. Pizza is not a fad. Pizza is for life. A basic margarita has carbs in the base. It has protein and fat in the cheese. I'm sure there's all sorts of excellent nutritional extras in the tomatoes too. It has all the goodness that you could possibly need. Yeah, does it have all the goodness you could possibly need though? I don't know, but I do know a man who does know. So, Dr. Giles Yeoza, geneticist who researches body weight and metabolism at University of Cambridge, and he's pretty fly in the kitchen too. Fly is a strong word. I mean, I know how to cook. How good I am. You have to ask my family, but I do know how to cook. Yeah. So, listen, the question is that a pizza made correctly can contain all the major food groups, and that's all you need to eat. So, I'm going to go for a basic margarita here. I don't think a basic margarita will do it because of the ratios. And so, I think we need toppings in order to try and make it up to the daily recommended amounts of all the things we need to eat. Let's get going. Now, I am going to cheat here. I have bought pizza bases. I didn't make my own. What the shaman? What? Come on, let me see your bases. Well, I haven't made my bases yet. This is the dough that's done. This looks like a lot of dough for one pizza. I get the feeling I'm going to be making two pizzas, but we'll have a go at this. Now, one of the reasons, Giles, that we think pizzas might be the solution to all of our daily intake is because there's a lot of food going in there. There's a lot of different types of food. You've got carbohydrate in the base. You've got, well, what else is there? What do we need, apart from carbohydrates? There are a number of classes of food, so to speak. So, you need your macronutrients. This is what we end up using as fuel and building blocks. And the fuel and building blocks are going to be carbohydrates, starch and sugar. Protein. I have got mushrooms and corn and fat. Mozzarella. Mozzarella, but that will have fat and proteins. And so those are macronutrients. But in addition to macronutrients, you need micronutrients. Now, micronutrients and minerals include vitamins, you know, A, D, C, etc, etc. The various trace minerals that we need, such as iron, calcium, iodine, and then, critically, at the end, is actually a part of the food, which we use very little of, but it's critical for our health and that is going to be fiber. So, that's what we need. We need macronutrients. We need our micronutrients and minerals. And we need fiber. That's what we need. Yeah, I noticed you bought some pizza bases there, Adam. I wonder, is this the point in the show where we tell the listeners that I once went around to your house where you made pizzas and instead of using a base, you used a non-bread. I did wonder if you would bring this up. Can I just point out that non-means bread? So, when you say non-bread, you're saying bread bread. Oh, that's your response to this. It was a good pizza and you ate it. OK, fine, fair point. One thing about this pizza plan, you know that pizza isn't exactly low calorie, though, right? Yes, well, there is wiggle room in here because an average man should be eating around 2,500 kilocalories a day. And as you well know, I'm a very average man. Do you know what a calorie is, though, Adam? No, I don't. Not really. Well, I sort of, it's to do with heat, isn't it? Because calore means heat in Latin. Of course you would know that, though. So, one calorie is actually the amount of energy required to raise 1 gram of water by one degree. And that has what to do with food, please? So, this is sort of, it's a measure of energy that you get from essentially setting fire to stuff. And that has what to do with food, please? OK. So, you have to imagine in a way that you've got like a teeny tiny combustion engine inside your tummy. So, stomach is extracting all of the energy from that food as it passes through your body. And it's an equivalent amount of energy to if you set that food on fire and measure the amount of heat that it generates. And that, historically, is exactly how we have worked out the calories in our food. OK, so, all we need to do now is just look at the back of the packets and we'll know exactly how much energy is in it. Yes. Great, except one tiny problem. So, let me see that the pasada here, for example, except the pasadas in Italian, I'm sorry, because I'm a little cloud-backed with Italian psychon-read. Mine says, so it's got energy, fat of which saturates, carbohydrates of which sugars, fiber, protein, and salt it. I mean, it really does break it down into proper fruit groups. But it doesn't give any micronutrients, because there's so many micronutrients in calcium and iron. So, they do tend to list the micronutrients and they will split fat, certainly remove the saturated fats out so you can see how much that is. And they will tell you how much sugar compared to the total carbohydrates there are in said jar of food. Got it. All right. Well, listen, I've got tons more questions about the metabolism and the genetics involved in this. But we do actually need to make these pizzas. So, I'm going to nigh gel over hell out of this. You need to roll your base. I do. I have already done that by opening the packet that the base was in. I'm ashamed. I just brought shame to my face. So, now I need a roll. Hang on a second. Well, you're doing that. I'm just going to reveal my cheat codes. I'm not using Poscaiser. I made my own sauce. It was just cherry tomatoes with some garlic and a bit of onion in there, whizzed up with a bit of salt and a bit of sugar. So I completely haven't measured any of this out. Thus making the whole exercise pointless. But delicious. I think this may be pointing out one of the problems we're doing this. We're trying to be really scientific about food, which is, I mean, this is bucket chemistry. We're not measuring things out in milliliter quantities. You're doing it by taste. You're adding salt. I mean, how scientific can you be about food when trying to fulfill things like recommended daily amounts of various nutrients? I mean, unless you're within a lab scenario, not particularly. And it is bucket chemistry because at the end of the day, if you remember, while these are daily recommended amounts, they're averaged, daily recommended amounts, right? Because obviously what you end up needing for an individual person will depend entirely, as you said on your size, on your age, on your gender, on actually how healthy or unhealthy you are, but on average, these are what are required in order to make sure that we have sort of like a healthy way of living. Yes, again, Adam, I'm on the third. Your flair for experiments would never fail to astound me. I'm more of a theoretical scientist, but I stand by my methodology. It's solid. Yeah, except that you've got no idea what's actually gone into your pizza. Okay, look, what I'm going to do here, I'm going to do one of the maths anyway, just to make sure that you understand just how wrong your margarita theory is. You okay, go on them. So looking at the recipe in adverticovers that you're using, you're going to need about one and a half pizzas to get sufficient calories for the day. Have you got room in your oven for that? Yes, they will fit just fine because my bases are a precise factory-made tenenches in diameter. You are utterly shameless. I tell you what, so Giles did take this a little bit more seriously than I did. I mean, I was basically making lunch by this point, but Giles's pizza should be a little bit closer to Paul's recommended daily intake. This is a vegetarian pizza and the way that I figure it, we're going to try and achieve this. A margarita pizza is going to be hard carbs, but I think we need toppings to make up a number of things. We need toppings to make up the amount of protein, the amount of fiber, and so that is what I'm adding. Sweet corn, do I see there? Sweet corn, I'm going to put sweet corn. So that is largely, as anyone who knows who eats sweet corn, when you look in the loo the next morning, they're still going to be there. So I don't know how much calories you absorb from sweet corn, that's one of the fibers things. I'm putting in chickpeas, which actually have a lot of protein. Chickpeas on a pizza. Do you not like chickpea pizza? This is where I think our plan to set up a science-based restaurant is going to fall apart. You can't put chickpeas on a pizza. That's, I mean, that's cultural appropriation apart from anything else. It's sort of like a deconstructed hummus. I think Hannah's face, when she listens to this recording, is just going to be a shock. Not a shock, so much as disappointment in both of you. Yes, I can only apologise. Just one thing I want to point out there, because you've now got deconstructed hummus and flatbreads. Are you sure that you're actually making pizzas here or a Greek mezzo platter? I made pizza. That was Giles. I am sorry about this. I did not take the instructions very seriously at all. Can I just claw this back a little time, you bit, though? Because it does turn out that he's not that easy to make a perfectly nutritionally fulfilling pizza. I asked a spokesperson from the British Diatetic Association, Claire Thornton Wood, to have a look at our efforts and possibly pass judgment on them. But first I asked her what she made of the whole idea of getting all our nutrition from just one mega pizza. It's an interesting concept. You would probably find it difficult to meet all of your requirements. And I suppose the thing is we ought to be eating a variety of foods and different foods every day. And by varying the foods, you're not talking about having like a Hawaiian one day in a pepperoni the next day and then a margarita the next day, pizza is not going to, is it your professional opinion that a pizza is not going to satisfy these, no matter how varied the toppings are? I think you'd have to be fairly inventive. I mean, I can't say it's absolutely not possible. I mean, what's the challenge? But I think a pizza every day wouldn't be something that I would be recommending on a regular basis. I'm willing to concede, especially after the cookoff that I had with Jiles, that possibly he and Hannah win this round. But when it comes to actually analyzing what the carbs and the fat and the protein, the nutrients that are included in Jiles's mega pizza, are they any closer and Jiles's pizza than, well, certainly than my margarita. For sure, forget the margarita, that doesn't come anywhere near meeting your requirements. I mean, that's basically carbs, fats, this bit of protein, maybe a few vitamins, that doesn't come anywhere close. The other pizza, I'm going to have to say, I actually was quite surprised at how much of your daily requirements it met. Take it down from me. What were Jiles's ingredients, toppings that came closer than not having any toppings? I mean, overall, the pizza, it was meeting his energy requirements and in fact was just a little bit under. The protein requirements were fine. The fat levels in the pizza were within the range that we would be recommending. And corn and chickpeas were obviously very low in fat and they're high in fiber. In fact, it exceeded your daily requirements for fiber and that's quite interesting because we actually know from the National Diet and Nutrition Survey that there's a lot of adults out there who are not meeting that. So that was a real plus point, I think, for your pizza. Your vitamin C was not adequate on that, so I would suggest that you maybe need to add a bit more in the way of fresh veg. Vitamin D in general doesn't come from your food. It comes from the action of sunlight in your skin but it's only made during the sun year part of the year. So actually a supplement is needed and vitamin D you can get in drop form. So as a sort of garnish, I was thinking you could sprinkle some vitamin D drops over your pizza. Mmm, sweet corn and vitamin D, eh? Delicious. Yeah, even less appealing once Jiles had finished making it. I can now report as I'm doing this about the success of this thing. There is enough sauce for half the dough. The diameter of this pizza is a foot, it's 12 inches, so this is a big pizza that I'm making, but that is only used half the dough and all of my sauce. So I can report already that this is going to fail because if I just use all the dough and the sauce for the kind of diameter we need, it'll be very dry pizza. Yeah. So I think this begins to demonstrate how this could fall down. So while technically feasible, we really want to eat this food that we're making. I think we're rapidly uncovering the difference between cooking and science. The proportions are all wrong because I made pizza before. While you put toppings on the pizza, you don't put that much toppings on the pizza because otherwise the pizza won't cook and it tastes a bit weird. This is a terrible spoiler to have, but I just... This is going to be the most awful pizza in the world because I've just done this in this way. So our listener Paul has asked us if we could make a pizza that contains the recommended daily intake of everything. And we have so far comprehensively disproved Dr. Matherford's hypothesis that a margarita will do the job. Well, to be fair, we haven't really disproved it experimentally. Yeah, only because you didn't even vaguely follow the protocol. True. On paper though, Jars' mega all in one pizza did seem like it might do the trick. Except that it was absolutely disgusting and that it didn't have enough vitamins or variety and it was too big for a normal oven and there were too many toppings to cook properly and that it would be a giant soggy mountainous mess. Right, right, you know, details. Sure, sure. I have actually spotted a more fundamental problem here though which is that we probably can't create an average pizza for everyone because there is no such thing as an average human. And so, we're already aides that we're talking about here in terms of macronutrients or micronutrients are averages. And so each of us are going to have individual needs and individual wants from our food. But surprisingly, we know little about it. We know that on average someone of this weight requires this amount of vitamin C in order to be healthy, but whether or not I might need 5% more than you or 5% less than you, we don't actually know that clearly. And so this is why the ranges that are actually given to us by the already give a big room for errors. But particularly for the micronutrients, they recommend slightly more than you might actually need in order to cover just in case someone needs a little bit more or someone needs a little bit less. And even if you can work out what the averages should be, turning them into guidelines, well, that's not that easy. They are issued after a lot of work, a lot of research, a lot of looking at scientific papers. It is true to say that it is quite difficult to get to these figures sometimes because when you're looking at trying to do studies on food and how it impacts on people. If you think about you wanted to do a drug trial, you can give one person a pill and you can give one person a placebo, and neither of them will know which the other has. But ultimately, if you want to experiment with how food impacts on somebody, you actually can't disguise what the food is. Yeah, there's no disguising that sweet corn monstrosity. Yes, you can't give placebo for food, can you? You're an experimental group, eat some sweet corn and here is some not sweet corn for you to eat, but we're not telling you that it's not sweet corn. And then you can't ask people to report because they get it wrong or sometimes they lie. But you can do it by looking at molecular markers in their blood. So basically the broken down products of the food that they eat that can't be disguised because they're in your blood system. Okay, all right. Well, now I have been a little bit flippin' about this pizza nonsense, but of course this isn't actually a new idea. There are some people who do drink food shakes instead of having meals, right? These are all in one nutrition drinks that are supposed to contain everything. So I asked Susanna forward who is an associate professor at Anglia Ruske University. She researched his food choices psychology about why anyone would ever willingly give up on eating. There are definitely a group of people who are very utilitarian or sometimes we can think of them as functional in their food choices. And they tend to be people who don't get a lot of the other things out of food. So they don't get pleasure, for example, out of the preparation. They're not really doing it for social status. They don't really care what other people think. So they tend to take a far more utilitarian approach and they might be the kind of person who would opt for some of these replacement shake products that are out there on the market. I think there are very few of us whose relationship with food is that utilitarian and that, if you like, one dimensional. For most of us it offers other things to our lives that we value. It seems that the people that do that do it very consciously and very intentionally. Maybe arises out of an interest in exercise, a somewhat analytic and systematic mindset, a desire not to spend time doing cooking and eating and maybe an absence of awareness of the pleasure that it can offer if they haven't had that relationship in their early life, then it's kind of hard to learn it in your adult life. And there's another problem with our single pizza diet too. On balance what will happen is you will get bored of it. We do get bored of food and there's a lot of research on this, particularly in the military where servicemen get given rash and packs that are typically very repetitive and where they do need to eat those calories because they're on exercise. And the biggest problem is boredom. So yeah, you probably can eat the same food every day that's perfectly nutritionally balanced. You'll get bored of it and you'll not want to eat it so much. And actually for trying to lose weight that probably wouldn't be such a bad thing. But in the long run it isn't a great idea. You do need the calories. So not ideal. Yeah, I never get bored of pizza. Even the one that Jarl's made. I was pretty bored of that quite quickly to be honest. Well, you know, there is something else that's missing from this totally absurd idea of only eating pizza for the rest of time. And that is all of the other reasons why we enjoy our meals. For some people and at some points in time, eating is primarily about being social. It's about the people we eating with. It's about showing those people who we are, what we're proud of, what our values are, maybe our cultural history, our personal identity. Some food choices are only about ourselves. We're going to eat that food on our own. And it is about how that food makes us feel. It's about maybe the routine pattern of expecting that particular food or drink at that point in time. And many food choices are practically constrained by the realities of where we are, what we can afford, what we can find, what we can prepare with what we have around us. And those in and of themselves are also influenced by our cultural context. Some really lovely examples about this in the UK. We don't really have rules about when it's appropriate for example to drink a cappuccino. But if you go to Italy, it is very definitely a morning drink. And if you wanted a cappuccino with your lunch, you would be given a very odd look by the waiter. That seems odd to us. But for example, if you went to a restaurant in the UK and said, please can I have a bowl of cereal for my dinner, you would get a very odd look as well. These are quite strong. Not so much rules, but indicators of what is permitted in terms of food choice. Very few of anything I've listed there has anything to do with biology or nutrients or government guidance or public health. These two about ordering a cappuccino in Rome after 11 o'clock. I'm not sure I entirely approve of this kind of food fascism though. It was in a Spanish restaurant a while back. And I wanted a cherry, a fino, before the meal. And both the waiter and my wife looked at me with such contempt. I mean, it was hatred and embarrassment sort of purified distilled. Perfectly, I'm just animal. Anyway, I think I've got another concern with this whole day's worth of food in a pizza problem. Oh, yeah, I mean, this is what number 47 on the list so far. I feel like you're bullying me a bit by this point. Yeah, sure. Okay, but the thing is the portion size of this thing is going to be absolutely massive. And I don't think that's a great idea. And you know what? Susanna agrees with me. There are many examples of scenarios of people eating quite a lot in one sitting. The extreme of this is really interesting. If you give participants who have amnesia a meal and these are people with profound amnesia, they really can't remember from one minute to the next. You give them a full meal, you clear it away. And then half an hour you bring back another full meal. They don't remember having eaten the meal half an hour earlier. So they crack on because it's lunchtime. And you can carry on doing this. And in fact, this is one of the few examples of a study which was cut short by the experiment. It's because they realised that these people with amnesia would eat way more food than was acceptable or tolerable or desirable in one sitting. Because once you've done two meals, you know, what's going on there and you don't need to repeat that experiment because the effect is so pronounced. Other studies have overfed people over days and these are not people with amnesia people with good memories. And if you overfeed someone for a week, what happens in the following week? Do they spontaneously correct and eat less? And the answer is no. We really don't. Yes, well, if I had the willpower to put half in the fridge, I'm fairly sure I'd be popping back about 10 minutes later for the rest. In the middle of the night? Yes. In your Nigerian satin pajamas with a crarat. I'll have you know that my pajamas are silk. If I could somehow follow this all piece of diet anyway, I'm fairly sure that my silk pajamas would be fairly snug, fairly quick. Yes, it does seem that way, doesn't it? And you know what, I'd venture that it's probably true of any fat diet. In the longer term, these things don't work. Their simplicity makes them appealing because, of course, eating healthy is really difficult for so many reasons. Even dietitian Claire finds it tricky. It is actually really quite difficult. I mean, I even think as a dietitian with a degree and many years of working practice, I actually sometimes find it quite confusing. And I think it's important that people think about where you're getting your dietary information from, you know, everything that you hear isn't necessarily true. So try and always think about using the putable sources and keep an open mind. And if you want to change your diet to be healthier, Susanna has some tips. My advice for people to make healthier dietary choices is to keep it simple for yourself. It isn't easy to identify the nutrient components of many of the dishes, but it is easy to set yourself rules that you can abide by. So for example, do you have two portions of vegetables in your lunch and your dinner? And the vegetable remember could be the source, so it could be tomatoes in the source, setting yourself the challenge, for example, of two portions of vegetables with every main meal is actually quite a useful and a doable one. So keep it simple. The second piece of advice I would give people is not to make radical changes, but to take the diet you currently have and identify if you like the areas of weakness. Speaking personally, that would be snacking behavior and alcohol. I think I speak for many people in the sense that we tend to eat the least healthy foods as snacks, go for a biscuit rather than the piece of fruit. An alcohol is a huge caloric contributor and identify those behaviors and think how can you only change those behaviors to be healthier? So just concentrate on what swaps you could do that would make them a bit healthier. So stopping a biscuit for a yogurt isn't totally removing the snack component. You still have a sweet something, but it's better than having a biscuit. It's not quite as good as having an apple, but maybe you would do want something that feels a bit sweet as a pick me up in the mid afternoon. So that would be my advice. Firstly, keep it simple. And secondly, identify your own areas of weakness and really just change those to begin with. So Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to making a pizza that will satisfy all of our daily nutritional needs, can we say that you didn't really attempt to answer the question? Nope, but I did make a delicious lunch. Sure. In theory though, it would be possible to make such a pizza. Although it would be colossal and probably need vitamin D sprinkled on top. And you'd get bored of eating it very quickly. Though I'm perfectly willing to give it a go. Every now and then on this programme, we'd like to give you a little peak behind the scenes of what it takes to go into making this extraordinary programme. Don't know where you're going with this, but I don't like it already. I say extraordinary with a race eyebrow because you may be wondering just how Adam manages to muster such an incredible performance in those final lines, those final words. And let me tell you listeners, it takes more than one go. Here is a little montage of the number of times that Adam, with varying degrees, of a Jeremy Clarkson impression, managed to finally read the words on the script. Though I am willing to give it a go. No, I'll take it. Okay. Though I'm perfectly willing to give it a go. Though I am willing to give it a go. Though I am willing to give it a go. Yeah, okay, fine, but straight back at you, as we've already established on this programme, we try to organise the script so that Hannah gets to read out the names of people, especially if they're vaguely European sounding. And so here is a little clip of the number of times she was saying, Eva Fleegam. No. No, I refuse. I refuse. I will admit that I did accidentally call it Angela Ruskin, though. It was very funny. The University Anglia Ruskin. Should we talk about the programme? Yes, so we've got it, as always, we now have an agenda. Can I tell you something first? Can I tell you something first? Okay, so you know there was Eva Fleegam. Eva Fleegam. Thank you. Who survived on smelling roses. Yes. So this is an actual thing, do you know about this? It's called Breatharianism. What's this incredible document you're going to see on this? It's people who claim that they can survive purely by breathing in the nutrients in the air. I think they sort of think their plants in a zonga away. I have questions. I mean, as you might have seen. They fully claim this. They fully claim this. They've got this whole following. It's like this massive thing. But for how long? For like years, not like, you know, for like years, like Eva Fleegam. Nice. Got it right, that's okay. Did I? You've. Right. Well, there's two possible explanations with my knowledge of biology and metabolism. One is they die quite quickly and two is they're not telling the truth and they're secretly eating those chocolates. Well, Adam, those kind of hypotheses that make you a good scientist because there was one particularly notable Breatharian, buttharian or Breatharianist, I'm not sure. Anyway, he was like this big kind of leader. I only heard from him in this story, but I was sure someone will write him, don't what I got it wrong. But he was like, I haven't eaten anything for 10 years, right? And then one day the police went into this house, had to go into his house for some other reason and found loads of McDonald's bags. So on the agenda, we've also got a bullet point which is Lord Byron being wet-lipped. So this is the thing that Hannah and I have been talking about for a few months now because we're going to get one in joke. Yeah, we've been writing about Byron in a book and a lot of that exercise was just describing it was just coming up with the best adjectives to describe Byron and it was your coinage to describe the message. I've always thought this a Byron that he is a very wet-lipped man. It sounds like I'm saying absolutely nonsense, but Google a picture of Byron in all of the drawings of him, in all of the sketch of him, he's got very wet-lipped. It's true, it's absolutely true and I hope, Curie, as you will never think of Byron without think about him being wet-lipped. So we've got some other things on the agenda which I think are diet related. Yeah, we should talk about the real science of dieting. So we said it quite quickly in that episode that fat diets don't work and that is not an opinion of ours. That is broadly what the literature seems to suggest. Although we had to caveat the language there because a lot of people do successfully lose weight on specific diets. Like 5, 2 for example. Yes, yes, but what atkins or... They all seem to work in the same way which is that people pay more attention to their food and therefore eat less of it rather than the actual sort of metabolic theory they're eating a load of protein is going to induce some form of different metabolism and blah, blah, blah. Or the 5, 2 diet works because you're eating less. There's that whole stuff about starvation, the fat around your organs and things and that's been widely discredited. I think it is. It is a very... It's an area of human sciences which is really laced with quite a lot of nonsense and it is useful to be pretty skeptical. Do you remember that thing about plate sizes? Yeah, yeah. Remind me though because when I say yes I mean not really. Okay, so this is quite an interesting. Really made news. This idea that the size of your plate, if you eat food from a smaller plate you end up eating less without necessarily noticing that you're doing so and that actually all you need for a good diet is just to use smaller plates. Maybe smaller calories as well I don't know. But just, you know, it makes you more conscious of it. And this was a very famous paper that was published and yeah, as I say like a lot of newspapers around with this as a headline. The only problem with this is that other people tried to repeat the experiment and found that they couldn't get the same results. That people actually just went and got seconds or you know, actually didn't make any difference to the amount of people were eating. And then more people still tried to recreate the results and were not able to. And actually that original paper is widely considered to be a big victim of what science calls the reproducibility crisis, which is that you get a strange fluke result just by chance and that everyone piles onto it and thinks that that must mean that it's scientific fact. And when you try and reproduce those results later, you cannot come to the same conclusions. Look, let's talk about the pizzas because obviously that was an experiment. Sweet corn on a pizza. I mean, that is absolutely disgusting. I had a meeting with Fiona, our other producer, in which we discussed pineapple. I think you weren't there for this one in which she declared that pineapple pizza was perfectly good. And what do you think about it? I think it's a satanic act, an act of possible insanity, certainly evil and should be banished. Hang on a second. I thought you were against food fascism. People and pizza is different. How do you feel about it? Because I think we've had a couple of food arguments on the programme before. There's been the spaghetti gates. There's been scorn gates. I mean, we need to have non-breders of pizza-based gates. That's a nice thing. It's pretty good. It's done by that. But I feel like this might be an area where me and you are unified against our action team. I think it is absolutely disgusting. You know what? You know what? When we were doing di-Susanna, di-Sanna forward. We asked her why people have such strong views about putting pineapple on pizza. She had something quite interesting to say. So this is a really lovely example of a situation where the debate is all about cultural identity. And pizza is a food that a lot of different cultural groups have dear to their heart. Obviously, the Italians have a strong relationship with pizzas and the North Americans have a strong relationship with pizzas. And I think in the case of pineapple, it's indeed the Canadians who are responsible for the presence of pineapple on pizza. So these are not anything to do in nutrition. This is all about telling people who you are as a cultural indicator. This is social signalling. In exactly the same way as wearing a particular brand of trainers or a suit, combination, and tie, we signal who we are in lots of different ways. And food is just dripping with cultural and identity signals. And I'm afraid that we argue about it is the biggest indicator of all that this is all about identity politics. Sorry. So it's not the Hawaiians after all. It's the Canadians who invented this God-for-saken, just travesty. Yeah, but you know she makes a good point there about comparing them to trainers. How many pairs of trainers have you got out of? 19. How many of those trainers would not look out of place on a high end auction site? Some of them. I mean what's tragic about that more than anything is that they're all exactly the same. Just slightly different colourways, but they're literally the same pair of shoots. I'm not embarrassed. Okay, we've got some clear conclusions here then. So pizza as a thingy we every day, absolutely disgusting, sweet-court, absolute disgusting, fine-offers and pizzas, absolutely disgusting. There's one main conclusion for this entire show. So for the listeners at home we should just mention that, although not recorded, JNR, other producer just came in our ears and said that we're both food snobbs and pineapple and pizza is absolutely fine. Yeah, but sweet savoury is a sophisticated palette. Says feet in our ears. Do you know we can just unplug our ears? I think we've probably said I used to think highly of our producers, but I think the only thing to do now is to just cut this conversation because they actually have the power in this strange relationship. Let's just do Cure Over the Week. Okay. Right, so this is coming from Ben Gordon. Now, bear in mind that we're recording this at the end of 2020, which has been an otherwise completely uneventful year. Nothing of note, really, to say about 2020. But Ben has sent us a photo because he's made the first curious cases inspired face mask. I mean, he actually didn't make it. He made it. I mean, this is a thing. He commissioned it from his local seamstress. He says, and he must. I'm not sure he qualifies to be honest. It is pretty cool though. I quite want one. So it's a full face covering as, you know, as is required. And the moustache, the moustache-y old gentleman is, I mean, it basically takes up his entire face. It's nice and twerly and curly. And it's a beautiful luscious, a black moustache across this white face mask. I think it looks pretty good, you know. I'd wear that. Well, Ben Gordon, you are Cure Over the Week. It is the end of the year. Some reflections from you, Dr. Fry. Despite how terrible it has been, I think that this year, the importance of statistics, the importance of, you know, mathematical understanding of the world, I think really, really the importance of science. Science has been center-states this year. I think that the demonstration of how a global effort towards something by scientists can come through. I mean, it's just incredible, not just in terms of the stuff that's happened with the virus. But, you know, things like protein folding as well. I mean, that's an incredible step forward that we've had. And, you know, advances to climate change too. I think I feel much more positive about climate change this year, right now, than I did a year ago. I completely agree. We are in danger of making a serious point. But I think you're absolutely right. And in some ways, it's been, I mean, it seems perverse to say, in some ways, it's been a brilliant year for science. There was a period earlier, it's a period in March where, you know, everyone in the public eye and on the news and on social media suddenly started talking about exponential growth. And I'm like, you know, sitting opposite at you and going, hold on a minute. They're talking to me right here. And then the same thing happened with vaccine developments. We've had a really busy year. So I completely agree with the sentiment. I would, however, like to have a slightly more relaxed. I think if you know, it's have a boring year. Let's have a really, really dull year where we're not called upon every five minutes by the media, although people are asking us, how does stuff work? What is a log scale? I'd like to go back to the world. What is PCR? Oh, wow. PCR. I mean, we've been doing it for 40 years. Never been in the news once, all of a sudden. Everybody knows everything about PCR. Doesn't PCR stand for pipette cry repeat? It does. It really does. It's a very nether jake. Anyway, we will leave you at that point. Thank you very much for listening this year. We are back next week with another episode. And in the meantime, please do send us all of your questions, all of your submissions for Curie of the Week, the prestigious prize of Curie of the Week, to CuriousCases at bvc.co.uk. Speak to you next year. Music It began with a plane crash five years ago. And unraveled into one of the biggest scantles the world has ever seen. From bbc radio 4, the conspiracy thriller returns with a final climactic series. A plane, a brain tool, building the fabric of time. They're all tracks. Leading to an ending. Tracks. Hear it from the very beginning. You can listen to every series now on BBC Signs.
