I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of science. Science. Science. I like it. MUSIC A menagerie of crossbreeds and a bag of strange names for this curious case sent in by James G on Twitter. He wrote to us and you can too, curiouscases at BBC.co.uk, with today's question. Today I learnt that tygons and ligas are what you get when lions and tigers interbreed. So what determines where the species can interbreed and why aren't ligas and tygons the same? OK, well given that you are our resident geneticists at a mercy, this one sounds like it's quite up your street. So going into my pants, what is the difference between a tygon and a ligar? Well, it sounds like the beginning of a really bad joke, but a ligar is the offspring of a male lion with a female tiger and a tygon is the other way round. And they're different. Yes they are. Can you tell the difference? No, I can't. They both look like big scary cats. If I showed you a picture of both of them, would you have a tell which was which? Nope, but they're different. Yes. OK, this is ridiculous. Are they the same species? No, they're hybrids. OK, that's that's solved then. That's the end of curious cases this week. Now, hold on to your zedongs here because this idea of how you define a species is actually one of my favourite subjects of all and it's about to get real messy. Why? Surely deciding what species is one of the absolute basics of biology? Well, you'd like to think so, wouldn't you? Except that it all went very wrong at the very beginning. People have been trying to define life for thousands of years. Aristotle made a decent fist of it in the 3rd century BCE, but he also thought that Dolphin snored, so maybe park that one for now. It was the 18th century Swedish accountant, Dawkins, obsessive classifier Carl Leneas, who had the first proper stab at trying to scientifically label all the things. During the course of his life, he published 13 editions of system A, natuary, his grand work of taxonomy, the systematic naming of all things. This scheme was so successful that we universally use it today. Genus and species in Latin. So we are homo sapiens, there's tyrannosaurus rex, the dog is canestimesticus, and then there's Felix Catus. You made that one up. No, Felix Catus is the cat. So hang on, genus Felix species Catus. Both mean cats. That's ridiculous. Well, you better strap in because it's going to get really wild now, because actually it turns out that loads of species are named twice. They're that good. So there's buffo, buffo. What's that? That's the common toad. There's a mollusk, which is called extra extra. Amazing. Because the genus and the species have the same name. Exactly, yeah. But then I think my absolute favourite example is the gorilla. So genus name, gorilla, species name, gorilla. Gorilla. So it's gorilla gorilla. But there's also another level of taxonomy below species, which is called subspecies. So there's the Eastern gorilla and the Western gorilla. And the Eastern gorilla has the dubious honour of being named after Friedrich Robert von Berringy, because it's gorilla gorilla Berringi. He was the first person to shoot one. Sure. I can see why they'd want to honour that. Now the Western gorilla, the subspecies name is gorilla. So the full name of the Western gorilla is... Gorilla gorilla gorilla. Yep. Amazing. I know. Can't make this stuff up. Okay, this whole name and convention seems pretty straightforward then. Find a species, give it a name, repeat it two or three times. What's the issue here? Well, the main problem with this scheme is that, like most people of his time, Linnaeus was a creationist. So he believed that the god of the Bible had created all creatures, and most people did at this time. And so what he was doing is he was striving to name all living things in their perfect, unchangeable form. So, you know, this duck is the definitive duck, and it is the duck against which all other ducks are going to be compared. Is that the problem then? Because the duck right now isn't going to look the same as a duck in 10,000 years' time. Everything's continually changing. Evolution is happening. Precisely, because Charles Darwin came along and pointed out that living things are four-dimensional. We don't just occupy space, we occupy time as well, and species are always changing. But hang on though, Darwin, I mean, he wasn't against the idea of a species. His big famous book was called On the Origin of Species. He was quite happy with the idea, no? Yes, but the question is, how do you define a species? And that's, I think, what this whole program is actually about. It's a really simple question to ask. But, well, I put this question to Professor of Genetics at Trinity College Dublin, Eiffelma Clisett. Well, I think it's a bit of a lie to call that a simple straightforward question, because it's one that people still debate. But probably a useful and practical answer to that question would be that a species is animals or plants, or whatever that are capable of mating and producing fertile offspring. So that's not a perfect definition, but it's one that works pretty well. OK, so if two animals can have a baby, and if that baby can have babies, then they're the same species. Pretty much, which is why ligas and tygons aren't new species, because they're both born infertile, which effectively makes them an evolutionary dead end. OK, well, this is easier than this is done. Well, notes that Eiffel said that the definition worked pretty well. See, the problem is that it's fine most of the time. And I don't know, but that's not much for a scientific rule, is it? No, maybe not. But I want to know another thing. If ligas and tygons are infertile, how do you end up getting new species, then? They can't always be dead ends in the tree of life, can it? Right, so this is a process that we call speciation, and there are loads of ways that it can happen. Here's Eiffel again. We call that process speciation, but there's more than one way that that can happen. So some of the ways it can happen are that there can be some physical barrier to interaction between the group of animals. Let's just say we're talking about animals for the sake of simplicity. And that could be a geographic barrier, a river or mountain range or things like this. That means they can't interact. And then over time, they just become different enough that if they were to meet again, they wouldn't be able to mate with each other. That all makes sense, I think, where one island spits off from another and animals are left to evolve completely independently. Yeah, there are thousands of examples of this. My favourite is bonobos and chimpanzees. So bonobos are panpaniscas and chimpanzees are pan-troglidites. It's a love of a bit of Latin. And what we think happens there was there as a common ancestor, what we now call the Democratic Republic of Congo. And the Congo River didn't exist at this time, and then it comes charging along, separated out one group from another. And that was about 1.5 million years ago, and then they continue to evolve separately. And eventually you have chimps on one side and bonobos on the other. And chimps and bonobos can't have babies? We don't think so. They do look so similar that they were only classified as separate species relatively recently, they do look different though, because bonobos always have a center parting. That's true. Is it always a geographical boundary then that causes speciation? No, but that is one really important way. It turns out that there are loads of ways that this can happen. So sometimes it can be a change in behaviour. But the interesting thing is that this can happen really quickly. But when I say quickly in evolutionary terms, it's not really quickly in the same way that most people think of it. Generally, we're talking about really, really long periods of time because when we're talking about a genetic incompatibility building up between two groups such that they are then not able to reproduce and so they're separate species, we're talking about lots of little changes accumulating. And these only accumulate with the passage of generations. And it takes a lot of those generations to get a significant amount of change. So yeah, we're talking about hundreds of thousands a year, is usually. Wait, I don't know if I totally understand this because if you're using that definition that two can have babies and their babies can have babies, isn't that kind of a discreet thing? I mean, you either can or you can't. How does that happen over hundreds of thousands of years? Isn't there just a moment where it breaks? Well, thus speaks a mathematician because biology just refuses to adhere to your tyrannous rules. The answer is we don't really know. There are so many different ways that speciation kind of occur and it's not just the physical, it's also at a genetic level and it's not very well understood. So it's a rule that can be violated because it appears to be quite leaky. That's different ways that speciation can occur for some definition of species that no one's quite happy with. OK, well, my friend, before you get too haughty about maths, let me bring some maths to your biology, Parcy, because on Twitter, I noticed fellow mathematician kit-yates from the University of Bath, posting a picture of a fantastic beast. So I've been reading research paper and I tweeted this image of a hybrid animal and it's a hybrid between a zebra and a pibled horse. It looks a bit like a zebra that someone's tipped a bucket of white paint over from just behind the head to the middle of the body and then they've come back and for good measure, they've dipped the legs in the white paint as well. So what are these things called? Any zebra across with another animal is called a zebraoid. So that's just a generic term for zebra hybrids. But this particular one that we've been talking about is a hebro, which is a cross between a male horse and a female zebra. They sound amazing as well as looking amazing. If you cross it the other way round, Hembrown. Yeah, right, exactly. If you cross it the other way round and you cross a male zebra with a female horse, then the offspring's known as a zaw. So you can start to see what they did there. Well, I've heard of a zedon, but I think a zawse and a hebrit, I think he's just making these up. Says Mr. Latte in over there. Well, okay, let me test you on another one. Do you know what across between a grizzly bear and a polar bear are good? Go on, tell me. Pizzly's or a growl of bears? That's hiding the fact that these beasts are probably terrifying. This sounds quite cute, little Pizzly bear. Anyway, the stripes on a zedon or a hebror are actually very interesting from a mathematical patterning point of view. And this is a story that features one of the greatest heroes of mathematics. There are a few different patterning mechanisms that come about when you are interested in the way the animals get their pigment. So the zebras, for example, one theory is by Alan Churring, who is probably most famous for his work in code breaking during World War II. But in mathematical biology, we claim his one of our own. So we have this theory where you have chemical species that move around the embryo when it's developing and they interact with each other forming what's called a pre-pattern. And this pre-pattern tells things where to grow it tells which genes to turn off and on or it tells cells to produce pigment or not. So he had this idea that you could take these two chemical species that react to each other. One's the activator, it enhances itself in another chemical, one's called an inhibitor, it inhibits its own production and inhibits the production of the other chemical. And after some chewing and throwing, they settle down to what's called an equilibrium. So nothing interesting happens. And then Churring thought, well, that's going to be boring. So I'm going to add something else. So we added diffusion. And now if you take a glass of water and you put a drop of food coloring at the bottom, then the way it slowly spreads out and eventually evenly colors the water is through diffusion, the random motion of water molecules. But again, that sounds really boring. It's just making things uniform. So Churring's crazy mad idea was to combine this stable reaction system with this stabilizing force of diffusion in the hope it might produce patterns. And actually what he did in this paper was to prove that it could produce patterns. And the great thing is that if you simulate these equations that he wrote down, then you see all sorts of fascinating patterns if you play around with the model. So you see spots on the ladybird or rosettes like you get on a jaguar or labyrinthine patterns like you see on a brain coral or stripes like you see on a zebra or on a tiger. So it's an amazing idea from this brilliant, brilliant mind. Now I really love it when maths and biology combine. Because that's you and me, isn't it? I mean, this is curious case is gold. Yeah, I totally see it. There is something really, really lovely about this idea. And I know that when you hear it and you're talking about activators and inhibitors and chemicals and blah, blah, blah, it sounds like it's very, very complicated. But there is actually a really simple way that I like to imagine this process. If you imagine yourself sort of sitting above a forest looking down on a forest, and in this forest you've got loads of rabbits. Now the more rabbits you have, the more rabbits you're going to get. They kind of have a habit of breathing. And the more rabbits you have, the more likely you are to have foxes. But as soon as your fox population increases, that's going to inhibit your rabbit population. So the very clever thing that you're indeed to really embed space into this model was he said that the foxes need more space. They spread out much more quickly than the rabbits do. If you kind of create a mathematical system that has those properties, what you end up with is foxes kind of scattered around your forest. And then little pockets where there are lots and lots of rabbits all clustered together, surrounded by a moat of foxes. So if you look down on it, it's as though you have these spots, these patches of rabbits in a forest of foxes. And that really is what's going on in skin pigmentation of cheaters and of giraffes and of all kinds of animal patterning. Yeah, I absolutely love that. And the reason I love it is because you see exactly this in embryology, so in the way that embryos develop. And you see it in loads of different species. So for example, feathers. So birds have feathers and feathers need to be evenly distributed. You don't want them in a cluster in one place and then have a big bald spots because that's not going to help you fly. And we know that you get your rabbit and fox analogy working exactly and how the cells decide that they're going to be feather cells and not the ones in between. And so you get this perfect distribution. And we only really discovered this in the 1990s. And it also works for things like neural tissues of how our brains grow because not every cell in a brain is actually a neuron. They tend to be surrounded by... Non-neuron. Exactly. In an almost perfect hexagonal pattern. And it was cheering pattern that explained that. And it even happens in the denticles and shark skins. Denticles. Yeah, these really spiky, tiny bits of skin that make them super aquedynamic. Aquedynamic. You mean swim faster. Swim really fast. And you just stop using over-complicated language, please. OK, back to the question then. What is a species? And so far, the best, but imperfect definition of a species is organisms that can make fertile offspring. But the question was also about hybrids. Why aren't ligas and tygons the same? And you, Adam and the Fird, said that they are different. Why? Well, because we inherit most of our DNA from both parents. But you inherit different sex chromosomes from your mother and your father. And this is where it gets real juicy as Ethan Macliza told me. There's this observation that if there is some leakiness in that process, if sometimes the hybrid is fertile, it tends to be the females who are fertile. Or more correctly, not the females, but the homogamyte XX, which are the ones who have two of a kind of the sex chromosomes. So in mammals, we're familiar with the XY sex chromosomes. So females are XX and males are XY, because females have two of a kind. We call them homogamytic. But in birds, for example, it's the opposite way around. So this thing called haldenes rule, which is when you have these hybrids, if there's sterility is more likely in the hetrogamytic sex, which, for most of the things we're looking at and thinking about, it's going to be the males. Haldenes rules, sterility is more likely in the hetrogamytic sex. You're biologists. You really don't like using simple words here. I know, I know. But you know, ligas and tygon's arm, even great examples for studying this kind of thing, because while they reproduce really slowly, they're really big. They only do it in zoos. They never meet in the wild or the lab. They're utterly terrifying. But there are loads of species that we can study in great detail, because they're smaller and much more user-friendly. As in, they won't eat you. Not being eaten by your research subjects is a life goal for most biologists. So what we do is we study insects and fishies, and guess what? Tell me. These critters seem to be able to hybridise all the flipping time and their babies are fertile. So I spoke to Johanna Meyer from University of Cambridge, because she is studying speciation and hybridisation in butterflies and fish. Hang on. You can hybridise a butterfly with a fish? No, you can't. She studies them separately. Anyway, it turns out that Johanna is not totally cool with the question of what defines a species. That's actually a surprisingly difficult question. We used to think that species are just groups of animals or plants that don't hybridise, so don't eat your breed with each other. But recently, we've been realizing more that many we think or clear species are actually still able to hybridise. And so we are reconsidering this now, and it's quite under dispute. But my species concept, the way I use it, is if two groups of animals or plants are coexisting, like living in the same place, and don't merge back into a single group, then I would consider them two different species. So Adam, this question that seems very, very easy to answer is actually my most dreaded question ever, because it's really, really difficult, and there's a lot of dispute. What is a species is really hard to answer. But it sounds like the version you're using. It's more a sort of practical answer than a sort of, this is the perfect description of what a species is, because there isn't one, is that? That's true, yeah. I suppose this is a perfect example of how unlike in physics, biology is a science absolutely crammed full of exceptions, and for all of our rules, we're more like guidelines. Yes, exactly. It's kind of like when you look at the mountain landscape, you see that there is mountains, and you are very sure that those are mountains, just like we are very sure that species exist. But then sometimes you see a hill in between, or sometimes it's not quite clear where a mountain stops and where the next one starts, and it's kind of similar like the species concept in biology. Actually quite hard sometimes to be sure if two things are two species or not. There's very clear cut cases, but there's many cases which are much harder to handle, particularly the young species, which haven't diverged for that long yet. Johannesburg is on one of the most exciting animals that we study in evolution, they're called cyclids, and they're little fishes in Lake Victoria and some of the other huge lakes in Africa. And we know they've only been there for a few thousand years, because we know that Lake Victoria is a relatively young lake, but these cyclid fishes have been having a wild evolutionary party for the last few millennia. In Lake Victoria, for instance, which is only 15,000 years old, 500 new species evolved. And they're extremely different, like some species feed on snails, others feed on algae, some have even evolved to feed on other cyclid fish. So they're extremely diverse, and usually they wouldn't hybridize in nature, but sometimes, for instance, when the water is very turbid, they don't see very well, and if they don't see that well, they may hybridize and mate with the wrong species. Wait, they accidentally mate with other species when they can't see them properly. Well, we've all been in a smoky club at one time and another, and you know, but here's the thing, they don't... Speak for yourself, Adam. They don't interbreed all the time, but they are capable of interbreeding. So if you put them in an aquarium, and don't give them the choice, eventually they will breed with any of the closely related Lake Victoria species. But in nature, if they have the choice and the water is clear, they do not like to interbreed. So it's a behavioral thing that is stopping them from interbreeding. It's not biological. They're perfectly capable of it, but they don't want to. If they reproduce with someone from another species, the hybrids are usually a bit less good than the perennials. For instance, if a species that feeds on algae has to scrape algae off the rock surface, interbreeds with a species that feeds on souplankton and has to swim fast behind souplankton and suck it in, then the hybrid, which is intermediate between the two, may not be as good at scraping algae or as feeding on souplankton. But interestingly here, we've already made experiments in the aquarium where one could see that then sometimes those hybrids are better at feeding on something else than interparental species is good at. And this is how new hybrid species may evolve. This is not what you said earlier. You said earlier that a hybrid offspring is infertile. Now, you're saying that these hybrid fish, born of a smoky club, can just go off and make a new species. Well, I told you that biology is messy. It is possible to get a new species of cyclic fish when the parents are, in fact, two separate species beforehand. And that brings me to my next somewhat frustrated question. This whole conversation, in fact, this whole program, makes me think that in biology and evolutionary biology, we've got a couple of major problems here. The first is that when we talk about trees, evolutionary trees, they branch from a single organism which branches into two. And that's how we've seen evolution proceed over the last four billion years. But you're describing loops. You're describing two branches going into one, which is not a tree-like structure at all. And the second is that our language doesn't work. When we say species, whatever the definition is, it's clear that the actual reality on the ground, or in the water, we don't really have the language to describe it. Yeah, that's true. It's more like a species continuum where at the beginning you have two diverging populations, and then eventually they may turn into something we call species. But where exactly we put this threshold is really difficult to do. And you're right, we don't really see it as a tree of life anymore. I think in the past few years, we have realized that we should actually rather see evolution and the diversity of species as a web of life or a network of life. Okay, let's summarize then. So species are defined as creatures that can produce fertile offspring and as they can. Correct. And hybrids are in fertile, except when they aren't. Exactly. And the tree of life, which supposedly was one of the most important ideas in biology, is actually not a tree. Not in the slightest. Got it. Is this why you guys use so many complicated Latin words just to cover up the big holes in your subject? Yeah, it's a massive distraction from the fact that we don't really know what's going on. And we haven't even mentioned what I think is the very best example of exactly this confusion. It is. Us. Us. I mean, I like to think that we're important, Adam, but I don't think we can be held responsible for big gaping holes in evolutionary theory. I actually mean you, specifically, because you are part of the undertale. Steady on. Actually, I am part of the undertale too. And in fact, pretty much everyone of predominantly European ancestry are part of the undertale. And this shows exactly what a pickle we're in, because when our ancestors bumped into the Neanderthals, from whom they'd been completely separate for more than half a million years, they did successfully mate, and they did have fertile offspring. And we know that because we carry their genes. Yeah, we do. Which actually means that when you're saying our ancestors, you better be including Neanderthals in that statement as well, because they are our ancestors too. So for me as a geneticist, that seals the deal. And when you're asking the question, were we the same species as Neanderthals? For me, the fact that Neanderthals are our ancestors, contemporary ancestors with anatomically modern humans. For me, that means they must be the same species, because we are the successful descendants of those matings. Is she saying that we are all Neanderthals? Or is she saying that modern humans and Neanderthals are the same species? Yes, she's saying that, the latter, that we're the same species. But I actually think that there's another way to look at it, which is that the problem is the word species. It's just not helpful here. We maybe could say not useful. I don't see how you can be the same species as one of your parents and not the other. For me, the biological species concept, the one that we mentioned at the beginning, you know, if you can produce fertile offspring, you are the same species. That makes sense to me as well. And clearly, Neanderthals are ancestors, just as much as the anatomically modern human they meted with. You get far enough down the road of biology. And all you see is just a load of professionals shrugging. Well, congratulations, you have just passed your first biology exam. The biology, it's a science of exceptions. We try our best to have rules, but they're always just really leaky. There's lots of mistakes in taxonomy as well, which is a different thing than the definition of a species being not always useful. I remember one time hearing a talk where it was this botanist and he was talking about these two different species of cane that were distinguished in the field guide by the black markings that were on one and absent on the other. And then eventually they discovered these were burn marks and they're just the same species. But this happens. Well, of course, it's great kudos to name and new species. And if you are the person that names it, then that's an important part of your scientific curriculum, VTi. Yeah, perhaps a slightly perverse incentive. You know, you wanted to be a new one. Same thing probably happens with fossils. You don't want to find the tenth example of something we already know. You want to find the first example or something new. Yes, and I suppose all of this is just us manifesting something I've talked about before in this program, which is physics envy. We have rules and definitions, but they work about, I don't know, three quarters of the time, half of the time. Some of the time if we're feeling lucky. They're more like themes than rules, I think. Guidelines. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to tygons and ligers and pisley bears, can we say, oh my? Yes, Dr. Fry, we can. They are hybrids, not species, because they are infertile. But loads of hybrids are fertile and can become species. And that includes us, because Neanderthals were our ancestors as much as homo sapiens. And biology is really quite a messy science. Which is what makes it so exciting. And full of Latin. Well, it won't surprise you to learn dear listeners, that that was pretty much my favourite episode of all time. It's up there, it's going to be up there, isn't it? Lots of words. It took us quite a while to do that, because I just was rambling on and on. That was the biggest issue today in our scripting day. Wasn't the script, wasn't the clips, all of that was fine. It was trying to sway it, either, not to launch into a biology lecture with every new sentence that needed to be written. He just wanted to give me a lot of background. I'm sorry, let me tell you this. I mean, the truth is that I did my undergraduate dissertation on howdains rule and speciation. And then I went on to the PhD in biological patterning in developmental biology, which is all the cheering stuff, which I just think is absolutely fascinating. Of course, no. I just really like the idea that you can sit in a room in the 1950s without having ever come anywhere near biological creature. LAUGHTER I think cheering had met biological creatures. He wasn't like studying cows or whatever, don't he? I think the original paper is about eight lines long, right? And he was just, oh, that's a nice equation. Let's just pop them down. And then it turns out, 40 years later, to be exactly how biology works. This is the universe is a very lovely thing. Beautiful mechanisms. Did you use it a lot in your PhD then, those equations? I literally hadn't heard of that until after I'd finished. What do you mean you hadn't heard of it? It's a proper example of convergence in sort of academic evolution, because I don't remember anyone ever talking about that. We learn about the pathways which are cheering signaling patterns. What? You called them cheering signaling patterns? Well, I call them that now. I don't recall ever having learned about that during the whole time we were literally doing it. Are you joking? I'm not joking at all. But people know now, right? You did your PhD now, what, 30 years later? LAUGHTER Thanks. It would be different, all right? The cross-effors happened. I don't think it's widely known, but the reason I mentioned the denticles, the sharks, these little lovely pointy bits on Shark Skin, which makes some good swimmers, that came up in an interview that I did on my other program inside science. It was a guy at PhD student I saw his poster at, at a conference, and it said, using cheering patterns to determine how shark scales evolved. And I was like, oh, cheering pattern, I didn't know about that. Maybe I wasn't paying attention. Maybe I'm really misrepresenting my entire field here. I could maybe, yeah, maybe a little bit. I mean, some good things have happened for biology in the last half an hour and some very bad things happen. Yeah. If you're a developmental biologist listening to this from the golden era of the mid-90s to the 2000s, perhaps don't write in. I think one of the things that happens a lot, I mean, we hear this over and over and over again. It's like this idea of someone sitting in a room writing equations that end up mimicking how the real world works. But I think it's important to point out that we do sort of cherry pick those examples a little bit. See, the question of this sort of patterning, it's not just cheering pattern, there are lots of mechanisms that we've been studying for years to try and work out why you get such perfect patterning. One of my favorites is wing spots on butterflies wings, which are really important because they have a mimicry effect. So you know how they look like eyes, so we call them eye spots. And you get these perfect concentric patterns. And so the question was, what is the actual chemical signature which gives you this perfect patterning? Now it turns out that it's the same gene that gives insects extendable legs, right? So they grow from legs and antenna in insects, grow from flat disks, they're called imaginal disks. And you get this gene expression patterns, which is in a concentric way. And basically turns a flat thing into a long thing by just telescoping out, right? And the gene happens to be called a wristle-less or distal-less. And it was one that I used to work on. You know what, we just wanna love this story. Right, so you get these extending disks that turn into legs and antenna. And it's shared across loads of different species. But it turns out it's exactly the same genes that give target eye spots in, for example, butterfly's wings. They do the same patterning, they just don't extend outwards. So the way you get a perfect three or four concentric circles is basically the same way that a leg extends. In at call. Now everyone who's listening to this knows how I felt for a lot of the day. Ha ha ha ha ha. Hey, let me tell you more about just a snippet. Just a small snippet though. You know what I did like about that, if I said that? All of it. How much do you restrain yourself from coming up with bad jokes about what do you get if you cross the tiger with an iron? Ha ha ha. This started listeners, curios, because when you said that, I immediately answered with what's the difference between a buffalo and a bison. And how did I like to me like I was an idiot, which he does quite often to prepare. But it just looked at me absolutely blankly and said what is the difference? And I said, now at this point, I feel like the majority of the audience will respond if I say what's the difference between a buffalo and a bison. They will say, you can't wash your hands in a buffalo. I'm looking at our studio. No, don't get it. No. No, no, me neither. John R studio managers. I mean, no. Jen, Jen, do you get it? Jen, producer. Bison as in basin. Thank you. Thank you, Bison as in basin. She says, all right. It only works if you've got a New Zealand accent. I thought that was like a standard. You didn't watch it in the beaten. I thought that was a standard joke. That's standard joke. What's still seen as a stote in a weasel? Do you know? Really? No. A weasel is weasel, recognizing a stote is stotally different. These are like bogs, standard jokes for nine-year-olds. That one, OK, I accept that one was gettable. Do you know my favourite one ever is? Go on. Is it better than that? Stote one. Yes, but almost no one will get it. Even better. What do you get if you cross an elephant with a grape? I don't know. Grape sign theta. What? Say it again. Elephant. Just so you know listeners, Hannah's a little bit hysterical now. I just think it's really funny. I don't get it at all. I don't get it at all. Get if you cross an elephant with a grape. Elephant grape sign theta. Basically, if you've got two vectors and you cross them together, then the equation is vector A, vector B. It's not much to dissipate them sign theta. So it's just... I mean, if I have to explain it, it ruins it. Don't look at me like that. I didn't understand any other words. You just said them. Shall I move on? Yeah, I think so. OK. The naming thing, which we touched upon, honestly, guerrilla, guerrilla guerrilla is one of my favourite bits of all-taxonomy. But you know, there are loads more species which have ridiculous names. You want some examples? Yeah, go on. There is a wasp. You know, we did the wasps last week. There's a wasp called aha. Yeah. Amazing. The genus is aha and the species name is ha. Shiny beetle called jelly bean. Really, really? Yes. The genus is jelly. It's just how it's this. Well, there's an official nomenclature committee. And they go and rub a stamp jelly bean. What about a mushroom found in Malaysia in 2010, which is called spongy former square pantsie eye? That's true. Are you serious? 100%. That's what it's called. This is about as much excitement as we get in taxonomy. Well, clearly. Do you want to hear some stuff that got sent in after our last few episodes? Oh, yes. We like feedback. So there was one about the grumbly tummy episode. And someone who signed off grumpy old vet. Right, they actually signed off grumpy old vet. Grumpy old vet. David, he's called. David said, if you want a real treat, ask your local friendly large animal vet. If you can listen to a cow's room and it's very impressive, you can use a stethoscope. But the most intimate way is to place your ear against the cow's left side in the correct places. If a cow has a left displaced abermasium... Do you know that word? Yeah, it's just going with that. You can ping her last ribs to cause a wonderful tin tabulation. And the cow will need surgery, of course, to correct the idea. But I'm sure the animal certainly enjoy it. OK, let's put this out there. Right now, to our vet or farming listeners, if you can make a recording... Oh, my God. ..of whatever you just said. ..and then someone else can set it to 90s... A drum and bass music. ..if you can do that. That is a guaranteed curia of the week. That's 100%. ..just setting that up front. OK, thanks. Thanks, thank you, grumpy, David. We've got one out there. Also about that same episode about the grumpy tummy episode. And some people were a bit grumpy with us for saying that the human body was like a doughnut, because there are lots of other holes in the human body, like ears and your eyes and so on. Now, the thing is... ..right. I just like to disagree. Well, eyes is my thing. I'm going with eyes and not holes for one. Well, you could sort of poke a stick in it, if you wanted to. That's a socket. It's a dent. Well, that's it, right? So ears, likeways, your ear drum stops it going anywhere. They're kind of dense. And that's the thing, topologically speaking, if a hole is like a dead end, then it doesn't count as a hole. However, what is true is that in the human body, your left nostril does connect up to your mouth to your soft kiss. Yes, it does. As is your right nostril. And in your tear ducts, left and right, there are two holes there that do also connect through to your nose, right? Via the used station tubes. Yes. So, but you can't count them up and be like, right, left nostril, right nostril, mouth, tear duct, tear duct, tear duct, and then aint, so you can't just count them up like that because of topology, my friend. Because, for example, with a t-shirt, how many hoses a t-shirt, haven't it? Head, arms, and bottom. No. Four. No. Because you could stretch out your t-shirt, if you imagine your t-shirt was really stretchy fabric, you could flatten it out so that the bottom became this sort of big disc around the side. Do you see what I mean? And then looking down on it, and then you've got three left, I'm right on Nick, three holes. So you can't just go, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, you can't do that. So the answer is... So I think the answer is seven. If you connect it all up, the human is essentially like a donut with seven holes in it. If we're being technical, I just wasn't counting tear ducts or nostrils, sorry. I was thinking about the main ones. What? A seven hole donut? Yeah. Is that a thing? Yeah, like a fidget spinner, but more holes. Whoa. Topology's weird. Cool, though. Is it useful? Yes. Is it? No. Right, well, that's another question that we've answered. We've just guaranteed Curie of the Week for listening to cows and recording it and setting it to techno, so do that. But for the meantime... Rather for the prize Curie of the Week. OK, this comes from Nicola Homer, a very hopeful Curie of, she signs it off. She says, dear Dr Us, we have had great, fine as a family, singing along to the theme tune of Curie of the Week. It's very catchy. And in a really big throwback to earlier series, and possibly the favourite three words that neither of us have ever said, the theme tune sung to, what about your offs? That's, you've got to be an OG Curie of the Week. Yes, you do. If you don't know about what about your offs refers to... It doesn't make any sense. You have to be back. You have to be back. Go back. But anyway, Nicola says, I was inspired to make a t-shirt with the Curie of Badge Design by Melissa Wagner and Malley, and the giraffe sporting a tash and sticking a tongue out in the shape of an inverteent. Question mark. I mean, this is a fusion of so many Curio themes. Can I tell you my favourite bit of the letter? Go on. I would like to gift my creation to Hannah. What? And I really hope that you will do me a worthy of the much-cubb of the Curie of the Week title and possibly even a badge if you still have any. Yes, I do do me worthy. I enjoy the gifts. This is the second time I've been to enjoy... I'm mainly enjoying when I get the gifts and Adam does them. That's the main thing that I enjoy. What, I hadn't got that far in this email. Why I just was reading how much fun this was and then looked at the picture, why is this happening? Well, I don't know about that. I mean, I did unilaterally choose Curie of the Week last week with the wasp, so... We're taking turns. You got to see a picture of Etatto. I got a beautiful picture of my wall and an amazing handmade t-shirt. Thank you very much, Nikola. Thank you very much, all I give the week so far. Please don't forget to send us in your questions, curious cases at bbc.co.uk and we will see you next week.
