I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! I like it. Yes? Where? I think we agreed you were going to start, weren't we? Oh, when you just circulated, you sort of pointed it yourself. Because your thumb was pointing at you and your finger was pointing at me. Basically, you did finger guns at me. The finger gun is the universal language for its yoga. Yeah, it is actually. Hello. It is the last episode in the current series, which we think is the 114th series that we've done so far. We've just lost count. I can't remember a time when I wasn't doing curious cases. Or even in this studio with me, that's how long it's gone on for. I'm so sorry. Every moment has been an absolute delight. You know, actually, we are going to have quite a big break now between this and the next series. And why is that? Because I selfishly decided to have a child. It is not at all obvious from the very obvious child I'm sitting inside you. I've got two weeks to go and I'm having to sit about four foot back from the studio desk. They've got a special microphone boom, which is actually leaning over the table to actually make it to her face. Do you know what I'm particularly looking forward to? I'm looking forward to having full lung capacity back. Because it turns out that when you do a lot of radio and live radio, especially, that is tough when you're operating on 20% lung capacity and being kicked in the diaphragm. Which is a facet of pregnancy rather than anything else. Yes. Not co-hosts kicking me in the diaphragm. Gotcha. Look you forward to that. You get out of breath. Yeah, really out of breath. And actually, I've listened back to a couple of recent episodes of curious cases. And you can kind of, especially after I've done a record of a long chunk of text, you can sort of hear me in the background just being like, Oh! And I'm going to do a really clunky link now. As the breath flows through your larynx into your farring, and helps you enunciate and make noises. A voice, almost. A voice, sometimes with words, sometimes just gustural sounds, almost like a roar. That's how I like to think of my style, yes. Give us a roar. We'll see about that. I think there's a lot of roaring going on in this episode, because this is about the voices of dinosaurs. On with the show, enjoy. Prehistoric mystery and Hollywood drama today. And dinosaurs, this excellent, may I say, roarful question was sent in by Freddie Quinn, aged eight from New Zealand. Is there any way of knowing what noises, if any, dinosaurs would have made? Well, we all know that dinosaurs roared, because I've seen it on the telly. Exactly, they roared, they occasionally screeched as recorded in this documentary series. Yeah, that was actually the Tyrannosaurus Rex sound, which was created for the film Jurassic Park, not actually a documentary. The current sound designer on the latest installment, which is Jurassic World Fallen Kingdom, is Al Nelson. And he worked alongside Gary Rydstrom on the first film. So how did they create that iconic roar? The main ingredient of the roar is actually a baby elephant. There's also alligator and there's tiger. There's also a whale and there's even Gary's pet dog at the time. It should be terrifying. This is the great white of dinosaurs as it were. So Steven Spielberg wanted something that was believable coming from this T-Rex. What Gary did was he recorded lots and lots of animals and then discovered that that particular baby elephant that was a bellow when pitched down had a recognizable sound as something that seemed like it would be coming from this bellowing carnivorous creature. So T-Rex is actually mostly a baby elephant with a few other things thrown into a vogue fear. Because we instinctively find roaring pretty terrifying because of what hungry carnivore mammals today who would generally quite like to eat us. Okay then. Well what can science tell us about what dinosaurs actually sounded like? Well I called on Julia Clark from the University of Texas at Austin. And she's part of a burgeoning new field called Paleoacoustics, which is aiming to discover just that. So would dinosaurs have roared? In terms of a roar as we think of a roar today, I would have to say no. Historically we put sounds in the mouths of dinosaurs that come from large carnivores that were much more familiar with like lions and tigers and bears. And the way that those animals produce sound is going to be very different from the way that dinosaur shaped sound. Why do you need to be able to create a roar? The roars that we're familiar with, you know, in large carnivores today, they're all created with a larynx, which is a vocal organ at the end of the windpipe. And this is very common. This is actually the vocal organ that I'm using to speak with you today. So it's incredibly flexible and it can produce a wide variety of sounds. But actually all of the nuance, the roar part of the call is going to come from the way we shape sound in our mouths. So the way we move our flexible lips, expand or contract our mouth. So these are things that are going to make, if you will, that roar sound. But I guess dinosaurs didn't really have lips. Correct. Yeah, T-Rex, not nearly as scary with big, smacky lips though. He's still in one of Kiston, though, right? Roaring is off the menu then. Yes. So we know what some dinosaurs didn't sound like. So we have any clues as to what they did sound like. Well, here's Dino Research as Steve Brissati. So the only dinosaurs, far as I know that we have some real evidence for what noise it made, is parasor alofas. So parasor alofas is a species of duck-built dinosaur. Technically it's called a hadrosaur, these big, plant-eating dinosaurs that lived alongside T-Rex. It lived about 75 million years ago or so in Western North America. There's really good fossils that are known from places like New Mexico and Utah in the US and also in Alberta in Canada. And it was a pretty big dinosaur. It would have been, as tall as about two humans. But the main feature of parasor alofas, the thing that is its signature, the thing that sets it apart from other dinosaurs, is this flamboyant crest of bone that sticks off from the back of its head. It is a bonnetube essentially. And inside of that tube, are the nasal passages? The nasal passages continue into that tube and they loop around into it. Okay, so what did this massive headhorn sound like there? Well, cat scans were used to build a 3D computer model by scientists at Sandier National Laboratory in 1997 and they gave that model to some instrument makers. So they used computer models to create simulations of how instruments will sound before they put them into production. And this is what they concluded that parasor alofas would actually sound like. Hmm, less of a diner or a bit more of a diner hunk that one. Yeah, parasor alofas has been nicknamed the Trombone Dinosaur. Palantologists have speculated that these were social animals and maybe they lived in big herds. And the horn section was to communicate over long distances. Alright, that's one example. But I'm guessing not many dinosaurs had trombone heads. No, I think that's pretty much the only one. Alright, well, Julia Clark told me that looking at the behaviour of modern dinosaur relatives could provide sound clues about the kinds of sounds their ancient ancestors might have made. Knowing that birds are living dinosaurs and clocks are their closest relatives, we actually can study behaviours in sounds that are produced in both groups. So for example, we know that both crocodilians and birds, adults and the babies communicate to each other. So when the babies hatch out of the eggs, they make a variety of noises. Those noises can even start before they hatch out of the eggs. And then there are also noises that both groups make to attract mates, to defend territories in the adults. And so we know some of the repertoire that we think all dinosaurs more or less would have had. Alright, so if you don't think that they roared because they didn't have the right anatomy, what noises could they have made? I think when we think about scary sounds, we tend to think of this open mouth roar, again, based on living carnivores. But if you listen to crocodilians, for example, they are using a larynx-based sound source. And they're shaping sounds in their mouths, but the way they do it is completely different. So their mouths are closed and they actually lower the bottom of their mouth and shape sound with the mouth closed. They can generate a variety of scary sounds. They're just not going to look anything or sound particularly much like a roar. Yeah, well that is still pretty scary. So we now think that dinosaurs might have made sounds with their mouths closed like crocodiles. And birds. Yes, but we know that birds have different ways of producing sound because they don't have larynx like us. They have the bird equivalent, which is a syring. Yes, now you might remember this. We had this in our previous episode on birds. Exactly, which is why birds, some birds, can sing two notes at the same time. Well, interestingly, a couple of years ago, Julius, he made a really important discovery in a fossil found in Antarctica. They found evidence for an ancient syring. And it's the first time it's ever been seen in the fossil record. You can think of where birds sing from as right next to the heart. The fossil that we found that's from the Lake Cretaceous of Antarctica, shows that this new vocal organ, this new sound maker that's located deep in the chest in birds, that it's present in this latest part of the age of dinosaurs. What we now need to do is go back and find more of these things to inform when there's a shift from a sound source like that in crocodilians to one like that in the Tweety Birds in your backyard. And that fossil that you found, do you know what kind of bird it would have sounded like? So the fossil that we found is from a close relative of living ducks. I mean, if I was going to make a guess, what a dinosaur sounded like. I know. Ducks would not be up there. Ducks, so we have dyno ducks now. I really think that dinosaurs are becoming less threatening by the minute. Did they hunk, Pachan? Well, possibly. Are they a Julia did say that some ducks also whistle? Yeah, which is also not very scary. So what about some of the more fearsome predators that roamed early on like like Tyrannosaurus Rex? Well, I asked Steve Brissarty, what do we know about how T Rex might have sounded and did it in fact make any noise at all? We don't know for sure, but I would be willing to bet quite a lot that it did make noise because we know that Tyrannosaurus were at least some of the time social animals. We've found a couple of different Tyrannosaurus in these bone beds, these mass grave yards where eight or ten individuals have been found together. So it looks like they lived in little packs at least part of the time. And with that sort of complex social behavior, you're probably going to need to vocalize to each other. So yes, they probably did make a noise, but it wouldn't have been a roar. And that really opens the question of what the noise might have been like. Alright then, what do we actually know about how T Rex might have sounded? Well, we do know that T Rex was a theropod dinosaur and that's the branch that evolved into birds. You're going to tell me that T Rex tweeted. Well, we just don't know that. We know that the syrenx appeared at some stage in the evolutionary record, but at the moment we don't know how early that might have been. We do know that T Rex had feathers at least as teenagers. You know, you've got to remember that there's something like 10,000 different bird species. And in the bird world, we find a huge variety of sounds, you know, an ostrich, booms and wrens, warble and cacapose hunk. Alright, if I can go one better than that. Because in fact, junior told me that she recently worked on a project to recreate what a T Rex might have sounded like for a BBC television program, the real T Rex. And this is what happened. So we went into a sound studio in Berlin with Chris Packham. And based on what we know about how the sound scales with body size, so bigger animals making more frequency scones, and knowing that bigger birds and crocodiles make sounds with their mouths closed, we tried to model some of the aspects of what a T Rex sound might have been. So we took birds and crocodilian sounds, and we actually brought them into frequency ranges that are generally predicted for an animal of T Rex's size. And so this is the noise that you came up with for what the T Rex would sound like. I mean, it's still quite ominous, isn't it? That's exactly right. We think of scary sounds having to be roars, but these were really scary sounds. And what actually was really cool to kind of learn from that little experiment was that the sounds quickly go below essentially are hearing range. So they go into very near, if not within, infrasound. And these are sounds that we wouldn't hear kind of as sounds, we would feel. And I think they're extremely scary. Now it just sounds like a sort of owl. Well, it's quite different to a roar. Right, definitely not as scary as the Hollywood version. So what do paleontologists think when they hear the T Rex in Jurassic Park? Well, I asked Steve Rissarty whether it bothers him as a scientist when the T Rex rolls. I wouldn't really want to stop filmmakers from doing too much. I love just the creativity that a lot of filmmakers bring to resurrecting dinosaurs. And although some of the details might be a little bit off, maybe T Rex didn't roar. Maybe it didn't. But I think they do far more good than harm because by showing these dinosaurs roaring, that raises the question. That's why we're talking about this. So I'm looking forward to the next Jurassic Park or the next walking to dinosaurs where they portray dinosaurs making some sort of crazy noise. And then people come into me and to other paleontologists and saying, could they really do that? And then that gives us an opportunity to talk about the fossils that we study. So Dr. Fry, when it comes to how dinosaurs sound, can we say, K-Sold? Well, sad to say, but we don't think that dinosaurs were rawerers because they didn't have the same vocal anatomy as modern mammals. We do know that at some stage, dinosaurs evolved the same vocal organ as birds called a syringe. But a big therapist like T Rex probably would have made deep, infrasonic booms rather than tinkily high-pitched tweets. The only dinosaur we have solid evidence for is the parasoral ophus, which may have honked through a huge horn on the top of its head. I was a bit disappointed, because I left a gap for you, Dr. Fry, to do your impression of a parasoral ophus. I know, I've turned you down now twice. I refuse to roar at the beginning, and then I refuse to honk at the end. I'm not a performing seal, they add them. Which is interesting, because we're going to come onto performing seals in just a minute. We certainly are. Absolutely love that. Apart from the fact that it's dinosaurs, which, as we've established, is basically the best type of science. Everyone loves the dinosaur. Everyone loves the dinosaur. But this was dinosaurs in movies, debunking scientific errors, which I feel like some of our audience quite like. Yeah, I'll say. But you know what, actually, we have to be fair to our questioner, though, Freddie Quinn, because he had a second bit to his question, which we have an answer, which was, what did Ankylosaurus sound like? I'm guessing Freddie Quinn, aged 8, Ankylosaurus might be his favourite dinosaur. Did you have a favourite dinosaur when you ate? Actually, it was Ankylosaurus. Was it? Yeah, I also like Packikefilosaurus, which you've talked about before, which had a massive, thick, bony skull that you used to headbutt other ones with. My was always deploticus. Nice. It's all, it gives great. I was totally obsessed with dinosaurs, learned all their names, etc. Until I was about seven years old, and my mum and dad took me to the natural history museum, and I was totally terrified. And then I never liked them again. There was one particular moment when I think there was like an animatronic, you know, sort of moving around and roaring, and I just stood in the corner and cried for about 45 minutes. That's to be coaxed out with a sweet. Is it deploticus or deplodocus, by the way? It's up to you. Is it? Yeah. Up to me personally. I set the rules. Yes, you do. Good to know. Okay, now I'll talk about, now I'll pronounce the name of the dinosaur with a trombone here. It's my way of the name of it. It's called Pericephalopolis. That's now in law. Okay, so let's go back to the Ankylosaurus. What did that sound like? Well, while I had Julia Clark, I asked her if we have any clues. Well, Ankylosaurus are kind of like, they look like little tanks. They're heavily armored, they're for-legged. Some of them have heavy club tails that we think could have been used at least as a defensive weapon. And they're actually a part of dinosaurs that is more distant from living birds. So if we think of living birds as one group of dinosaurs that survived to the present day, Ankylosaurus would be more distant cousins than something like a T-Rex. So T-Rex would be a closer relative to what we have in living birds today. So something like an Ankylosaurus, we got to remember, is a relatively more distant cousin of living birds. It's more likely that this dinosaur may have still had a larynx like a crocodile. It's quadrupedal, so the ancestral dinosaur and living birds stand on two legs. But Ankylosaurus have lost that. They're secondarily for-legged, like four feet on the ground. And they're kind of a mid-sized animal, they're bigger than most birds. So if we had to reason from what we know of animal communication more generally, we might think that Ankylosaurus are more likely to have an adult sound similar to that of the croc, Crocodilion. I absolutely love that. I've got to say something about Julia Clark now, because we've had steep resorties about intelligence on the curious cases before. And he's one of my favourite scientists. I just love his work so much. But Julia Clark and your interview during the show did something which may have just tipped the balance for me. Do you know what she did? Go on. She referred to lions and tigers and bears. She didn't finish off with an, oh my. She was referencing films without even noticing. Well, maybe it was deliberate. I don't know how, do you reckon the Curio spot how many film references you try and put in? It's about 80% of my scripts. Yeah, I agree with that. I often take them out, I'll be honest. That's true. My baseline is it has to work on one level. Not on no levels. It has to work as a sentence. That's my rule. This is why this programme has been such a joy to me, because it's not just about dinosaurs, it's also about films. And this whole business about how we think dinosaurs sound because of Jurassic Park. Where they took a lot of the science very seriously, not all of it. And the fact that we had Al Nelson on talking about how they made the noises for the T-Rex was brilliant. But we actually got some more on how they made the noise for the Ancaylaaurus, which is exactly what Freddy Quinn wanted to know. That's actually one of my favourite dinosaurs. That's a new dinosaur that was brought into Jurassic World I. The Ancaylaaurus is an herbivore. And it's a little bit of a passive dinosaur. And so I wanted something that sounded kind of whiny and a little pathetic and sad and bellowy. And they're sort of protecting each other. And one of the sounds that I used is a tiger, but it's a tiger in heat. And it's sort of making this funny, moaning, bellowing, calling sound. And so tigers don't just roar. They also chuff, which is a sound I've used in other dinosaurs. It's this sort of... kind of sound. And that means they're happy. And then they also make moaning sounds. And it's the way they communicate with each other sometimes. Just speaking to each other as siblings or as friends. And so those are some of the sounds in there. And then the other sounds are from a blind sea lion at the San Francisco Zoo. It swims around and it's calling to its keepers. It's calling for breakfast. It's calling to the people who are watching it. And it's just saying, hello, I'm here, I'm lonely, I'm hungry. And it has that similar sort of bellowing, plaintive sound about it. And so when we put those two vocalizations together, the plaintive moaning tiger with the plaintive calling hungry sea lion, we come up with our Anchylosaurus. Manny. Manny. Yeah, I've got some questions. Out of context, that just sounds bizarre. Well, hey, I think it sounds quite a lot like a stomach grumble just before lunch. Or Chibaka. Or Chibaka this time. Why does the sea lion have to be blind? I don't think its blindness was relevant to the noise it was making, but it's an added detail. And we're all about the details. Well, look, that's just one example, but there are so many good examples of how they created the noises for, for the Jurassic, the various Jurassic World films that came out of Gary Ridesdrom and Al Nelson. Do they get more of school than a blind sea lion? Right, think of some of the most iconic scenes in those films. The first one being massively iconic. Yes. Okay. The iconic scene in the kitchen with the, with the Velociraptors, where kids are hiding in the cup. Yes. Right, so it makes a noise which is kind of like a bark. Sounds a bit like this. Oh, yeah. Terrifying. Yeah, exactly. How do they make that? God, I'll give you this crisp 10 pound note if you get this right. I don't know, running a finger down a comb. It was two tortoises having sex. Good. Okay. So, now you know what I'm saying. That sounds like, okay. There's another classic scene with the Velociraptors, where Maldun, who's the hunter, played by Bob Peck, he sees one in front of him and he realises that actually this is a decoy because there's one behind him that is about to eat the, but Jesus out of it. This is in the first film, Jurassic World. Exactly. And he says the iconic line, he says, clever girl. Oh, yes. Yeah, which I love. So, it makes a noise in that one which is... Clever girl. A goose. It's actually just a goose, isn't it? I mean, you know, have you ever been chased by a goose? They're quite clever and... It's absolutely terrifying. Terrifying animals and they hiss, apparently like the Velociraptors when you're being hunted. And chasing is another good one. So, you've got another iconic scene in the first film is the flocking galomimuses. So, they come over the, over the brow of the hill and Sam Neal and the two kids are amazed because they're flocking, they're behaving like birds. The noise that they're making is from horses running. Not birds. Not, not birds. Imagine that job. Your job is to go to zoos and sea world and record tortoises having sex. And blind sea lions. Blind sea lions. I wonder what the catalogue of sounds that they didn't use looked like if those are the ones that made it. Imagine their archive. Incredible. Yeah, or pitching that as the, as the sound, the special effect sound guy going up to Stephen Spielberg and saying, well, this is the range of options available to you. Anything you'd like from this buffet cart of animal grunting. And Spielberg going, that's definitely the one I want. What is it? I don't worry about that. That's the one you want. That's what you're going to get. It's definitely not towards the seven sex. You know what I really like that. I liked how Steve said that he didn't particularly mind that actually these noises were not accurate noises. That was nice because I think it's actually not always the case. Sometimes when you see something that's scientifically inaccurate in a film, it drives scientists completely mad. Are people can be strangely pedantic about scientific inaccuracies in entertainment? People tend to assume that I'm super pedantic about scientific accuracy in films. I don't know why they think that. But I'm not. Mostly I don't care. There are some things which really annoy me. Go on. Well, it's more to do with the quality of the film than the. The scientific accuracy. I like it when people get pedantic, but they're doing it with full awareness that it's a slightly tongue-in-cheek. Like there was one example in a scene in Titanic where Rose is hogging a piece of wood. It's clearly big enough for both of them. And she's lying on a back while Jack's freezing to death in the water. She looks up at the sky and you know the seas, sees all the stars, right? And then you know Jack dies. He dies. Oh, sorry, spoiler alert. Jack dies. The Titanic sinks. He dies. It's more than 20 years old. I think it's enough time is a lapse. But there were a group of scientists who were extremely upset, extremely upset, that that night sky that was displayed was not the exact configuration of stars over that exact location on that exact date. Wow. And I believe that James Cameron actually in one of the director's cuts replaced that image on the basis of their complex. I mean, that sort of archaeological astronomy is a real thing that we can actually do because we know the position of stars thousands of years in the past. Of course. Thousands of years in the future. Frankenstein. So the writing of Frankenstein, Mary Shelley wrote Frankenstein. It was the legend was it was written over a 24 hour period. Yeah, they had like a booze up, didn't they? Mary Shelley and Percy Bischell. And what's a love list is dad called that guy? You know the poet. Yeah, Byron. There you go. God, we should stick to science, shouldn't we? I didn't know that. Anyway. The legend was that they were in this place in Italy. I think it was Lake Como and she describes how the moon was flooding through the the shutters. And this was all part of her sort of waking nightmare and she conceived of one of the great science fiction stories of all time. She was 18 at the time. A couple of years ago, some astronomers worked out that there was a super moon over Italy at that time. And it's probably accurate that the moon would have been flooding through the shutters causing her to freak out and imagine Frankenstein. Isn't that cool? That is cool. I like that. Yeah. I like that a great deal. You know what else is cool? Curio of the Week. Rather than a prize, Curio of the Week. Okay, so some feedback before we get to the actual Curio of the Week in reference to the episodes on instruments, the instrumental case where we were playing around in the orchestra with the Curio's cases band. In which three talks about Jamba Wamba? We did reference Jamba Wamba. And I need to apologise to Jamba Wamba because they turns out they did a song called Charlie, which John G from Twitter pointed out to me. Charlie is about Darwin. And it's not my favourite song. It might be my favourite song about Darwin. Is it your favourite song about Darwin by Jamba Wamba? Definitely is that. But the lyrics are completely amazing. And it's all about how he contested religious doctrine of the time and came up with the evolutionary theory. So sorry to Jamba Wamba. Well, they're listening. You've learned your lesson now. Now it looks like we've got two contenders for Curio of the Week this week. Although John G, sending in that tweet, possibly a third contender, have a lot of badges to give out. Let's start off with Kevin Wakeley. He's written in saying, I just listened to the episode entitled an Instrumental Case, where you make a kazoo out of a character. This reminded me of the vegetable orchestra from my hometown Vienna. The vegetable orchestra, as the name suggests, make instruments out of vegetables. To quote from their Wikipedia page, the instruments which are all of their own invention, include character recorders. Glappers made from eggplant, that doesn't even make sense to me. How is an eggplant going to be structurally sound enough to flash in a clapper? Oh, it gets worse though. Trumpets made from zucchini. That's courgettes for those of us on this side of the water. Yeah, he goes on. He says the instruments are made from scratch, just one hour prior to each performance. Well, that makes a lot of sense. Yeah, using that. So they're not preserving them all, making your eggplants. What do they do with them after? Oh, here we go. Then all 90 pounds of vegetables are cooked into a soup following the performance. Presumably they wash off the performance spit. I like the idea though. Big orchestra sound followed by a feast. I wonder if this orchestra charges their drills beforehand. That's going to be... I also wonder if they have a more sensible drill bit to use. There's nothing wrong with my drill bit. If you look at the... On YouTube, there's clips from me. You look at the size of the carrot they're using. There's one that says at least a 14 mil hole through the centre of a carrot. Give it how long is it? That's not the issue at stake. That was Kevin's suggestion. You can look on YouTube for the vegetable orchestra from Vienna. That's our first contender, but curative. The second comes from Agui Vogue McBride and goes, couldn't help but notice how quickly the conversation and the instrument podcasts moved away from the fact that Adam used to play the violin in the 90s folk band called the Only Fruit. This seems as shame. I think I need to hand this over to you at this point, Hannah. Hannah, why not take this opportunity to allow Adam to relive his misspent youth by forming a tribute folk act? Imagine the glory. Hannah could sing, Adam could play the violin, all the smallest pubs and student venues of it. It was good once again. Come alive to the sound of your cheery upbeat fiddling. By way of encouragement, I've taken the liberty of mocking up your first band poster. The band name might be tricky, but since you're both BBC presenters, therefore totally unbiased and dedicated to giving equal prominence quite right, I suggest using other fruits are available. And your first single, of course, can't drill a carrot. There's a picture of us and these chapters into a street in it, which is a little cat in the background, I'm not quite sure why, but there we are. This would be our second album after our Danish metal album with an interabang and whatever the reverse of this. Quite a musical back catalogue we're creating here. We didn't got a violin in my hand, we both got my stars. There's also a PS here, which is, I'll explain the cat. Please notice there's a particularly terrified neighbourhood cat in the background reacting to Hannah's singing. PPS, Love the Show, Hannah is my favourite. There's a lot going on there. There's a lot going on there. You know, he's dis-sing-ing, but then says he's your favourite. I don't know. I like him. I like him. Okay, who gets cured in the week then? I think it has to be Agui. I think that's how he pronounces name. It's brought AGU IE. I think it has to be because he's done the album cover. Yeah, that's legit. Do they get a bad to them? I think so. Do you know what an anagram of Agui, Vogue, McBride is? It was me. I get a curia badge now. Oh, my goodness, me, Hannah. You monkey. I can't believe I fell for that. Did you actually? Michelle's just coming, she's giving her a badge. That's what Michelle said right at the beginning. I went through the week. Otherwise, I wasn't allowed to badge. And now I have one. You know what the worst thing about this is? What? To do that album cover, which I actually did did. Do you do that? I did, I spent ages in Photoshop doing that. And the things I couldn't get, a rights free image, full body image of you, so I had to pay £1.99 for that image. Was you really? When Michelle sent this through a couple of days ago, I was like, that's brilliant. I'm extremely smug now with my curia badge. You did that all just to get a flipping badge. You haven't got one. This is brilliant. I think we should also give curia badges to the other two. Well, Kevin Wacley's definitely getting one. And it's not a sympathy badge, Kevin. You're clearly the best and honest. Most honest curio this week. You can't be a curio. Your name's in the title of the programme. I can be a curia, I'm curia of the week. Well, on that note, we leave you for a long summer without saying to this house. We are back in the autumn with a brand new series. So all that remains is for us to thank our wonderful producer, Michelle Martin. All of our various studio managers that we've had along the course of the series. And to thank the curias of the week, of which I now count myself proudly among them. Anyway, look, we're back in October. Remember to subscribe to the podcast if you feel like it, you could rate us because that really makes big difference for other people discovering the show. And do also send us in more brilliant questions and entries for Curia of the Week to Curiascases at BBC.co.uk. Every entry from now on, I'm going to D and Anna Grammys. Whatever the word is, I'm just going to make sure. Look, look, bright come on. People from all, I thought it was Canadian. See you in the autumn. I'm Greg Fertt and I'm hosting a new Radio 4 podcast called The Best Things Since Sliced Bread. I'm on a bunk busting mission to find out if the latest life-changing products and social media crazes really are all there cracked up to be. Each week, I'm joined by a special guest and leading scientific experts to run a whole host of wonder products through the evidence mill. Blair-based-is-turned-cheese enthusiast Alex James will come in to discuss the fizzy drink de jour, kombucha. I've got rapper, actor and podcast pro, scrubious pip looking at what we can do to beat the winter bugs. And we kick off with actress writer and beauty blogger Rebecca Humphries. We turn our BDI evidence towards the beauty industry. Separating marketing hype from hard science is the best thing since Sliced Bread. Listen on the BBC Sounds app.
