I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC Oh, hello! It's another episode of Curious Cases. Welcome, welcome, welcome. MUSIC You looked a bit surprised then. MUSIC As if we hadn't been sitting in the studio for the last hour of rehearsing this. MUSIC Actually, we're sitting chatting about different films that we've been seeing with our families. And we almost got tolled off it away. MUSIC Did I was studio imagine who just started playing the music. We had to jump into action. So that's what you heard there. MUSIC Hello! This episode, at Valentine's Day special, it's all about love. And this is a podcast, so you may be listening to this at any point from the 7th of February into the entire future. You can though. Whatever time of year or whatever, how far into the future you're listening to this. You can still enjoy all of Adam's song references. I'm really sorry about this, but I found it quite difficult not to... This is about the power of love. And of course, there were three big power of love songs in my youth. Did you know what, right? Okay, I want to hear what those three power of love songs were. But I also want to see how quickly you can name songs that have love in the title. Ooh. Okay, so I'm going to give you 10 seconds, and I want to see if you can get more than 12. The power of love, my thank you guys, is Hollywood. The power of love by Jennifer Rush. The power of love by Hugh Liu in the, it's in the news. Love is the drug by Roxy Music. Love is in the air by that band from the, that goes. That's five. That was terrible. Yeah. So now, given that you can only do five in that time. Imagine how long he spent thinking up the number of love songs that I mentioned in this program. There was quite a lot of YouTube being involved in the script writing process. And it should be said that all three of those power of love have some of the worst videos of all time associated with them. I urge you to go and watch them. Indeed. But first, have a listen to our program. Love is in the air and we have not one, but two valentiney questions. Yes. The first lovely query was sent in to curious cases at BBC.co.uk by Jessica Glasgow, who asks, how powerful can love be? Yes, the power of love, a force from above. What, like a gravity? No, like Frankie goes to Hollywood. Oh. Yeah, but you know, they do say the power of love is a curious thing. I think that's enough now. I don't know more song references. It can make one man weep and can make another man sing. We know that millions of songs have been written about love. Right. And poems and books and films. But here on curious cases, we're a science program. So what does science have to offer on the subject of love? Right. Well, first things first, we need to define our terms. What is love? Please stop. I'm serious now. When you think about it, it's pretty hard to pin this down. Is it a feeling or an emotion or just a way to sell loads of really terrible power ballads? Well, I called on our resident psychologist Claudia Hammond, who wrote about love in her book Emotional Roller Coaster. So what's Claudia's favorite scientific definition? There's a psychologist called James Averill, who's really interesting. And he says, saying you're in love with someone is just a shorthand for loads of behaviors that you will basically stay with this person and you'll be nice to this person. And you'll be faithful to this person and that now you're together. And so you say you're in love with each other to kind of make this psychological contract, which makes it sound so unremantic. I'm sorry about that. That's a sort of... A psychology for you. A semantic legal argument about bonding. It's true. It's true. But yeah, it's a way of saying that you take them very seriously and you have their best interests at heart and you can make your future plans together. And all of this gets encapsulated in the phrase in love. Yeah, it's not very romantic, is it? I can't really imagine lots of songs about verbal contracts outlining, except for behavior and future expectations. I think we could launch our curious cases Valentine's Day cards. My darling, I take you very seriously and have your best interests at heart. Maybe I'll put that one on the back burner. But you know, this certainly doesn't even begin to explain that completely overwhelming and slightly extreme experience of falling in love. In the beginning, you have this huge flush. I mean, you can't stop thinking about this person. I mean, they're camping in your head. You wake up thinking about them. You go to bed thinking about them. Helen Fisher has been studying love for 50 years. Together with a team of neuroscientists, she conducted a famous experiment where they put loved-up couples inside a brain scanner to investigate the power of love. And this is what they found. When you're madly in love with somebody, that you get activity in a tiny little factory near the base of the brain called the VTA or the Ventual Take Mental Area. And that little factory makes dopamine and sends this natural stimulant to many parts of the brain that gives you the energy, the euphoria, the focus, the motivation, and the craving, the obsessive thinking of intense romantic love. And what's so interesting about it to me is, I had thought that romantic love was an emotion or even a group of emotions, which it is. But it's basically a drive. This basic brain system lies way below the cortex where you do your thinking, way at the base of the brain with the drives. As a matter of fact, that factory lies very close to a factory that orchestrates thirst and hunger. Thirst and hunger keep you alive today. And what romantic love does is drives you to form a partnership and send your DNA into tomorrow. Years, DNA. I have questions. Now look, I've had an MRI and I can confirm it really isn't the most romantic of settings. How did she get people to feel loved up inside a scanner? Well, what she's got to look at photos of their sweethearts on a screen to really get those love networks in their brain firing. And then she would compare what happened to when they looked at photographs of neutral people. Pretty sexy that. There is. But I importantly in the middle, she had them do a distraction task. I just stopped them feeling loved up. So she would flash up large numbers on the screen and ask them to count backwards in increments of seven. This is like your dream dates. You know what? It's totally very romantic. But interestingly, Helen also told me that there is a region in your brain that's involved in something called negativity bias. And that becomes much less active when you're in love. Right. So this is the theory that negative thoughts and events have a much greater effect on our thinking than positive ones. Yeah. And this is something that's dampened when you fall in love, which is something that could explain that whole idea of rose tinted glasses. You know, when everything about your new partner seems absolutely wonderful. Yeah, until you've lived with them for a few years and the way they stack the dishwasher becomes just madly. Well, exactly. And clearly our brains aren't going to stay doped up forever because we'd never actually get anything done. OK, and here's where the next love mystery lies. Because for decades, biologists have been trying to get to the bottom of pair bonding and monogamy. Why does some animals seem to settle down with one mate and others are at it like the proverbial rabbits? And then came along a small furry brown mammal that gave us a big clue. The Prairie Vol is a cute little critter found hiding in the hay fields of Midwest America. Unlike the vast majority of mammals, these creatures, it was thought, mated for life. Their cousin, the Monten vol, is not quite so picky. Fascinated biologists wondered if these faithful furballs could hold the key to unlocking the mystery of monogamy, clearly having to volunteer to take up the tail. So they've done various experiments where they've done things like block one particular hormone oxytocin, which is sometimes referred to as the hormone of love. They've blocked that and then rather than be monogamous, they will suddenly nip off with all the other voles and behave rather more like this other lot, the Monten voles, which are not quite as monogamous. And so they change completely their behaviour just by this one hormone being blocked. Right, but the problem is that when you dig around in these kind of animal experiments, it's just not that simple because we now know that not all prairie voles are that monogamous, and it's the same with swans. And penguins, we think, oh, they're in love and they wait for each other on the ice, for them to come back from the sea and it's all lovely and then it turns out that... They don't, do they? They don't and that they may mate for life, but they're off with other penguins. And so yes, I think it is easy to romanticise that. How much are we projecting what we would like in the ideal love match that we would see? Right, because humans are not penguins. Or indeed prairie voles. You know, on beginnings, get a handle on this biology business. Sticking sometime, but I'm there now. But when it comes to long-term attachment, Helen Fisher decided to do a follow-up study, looking at the brains of couples who had been in a relationship for decades to see what had changed. In these long-term lovers, we found activity in the VTA, like with feelings of intense romantic love. We also found activity in brain regions, like with feelings of deep attachment, and instead of seeing activity in brain regions linked with anxiety, we find brain regions active linked with calm. So it is somewhat different, no question about it. And when you think about it from a Darwinian perspective, it would really not be too adaptive to be racing around the dining room table after each other and forgetting to feed your children. Did you bust anyone, Helen? Did you discover that anyone really wasn't in love with their partners, despite them saying they were? After scanning somebody, but this was fortunately in the preliminary, I did, yes, he was scamming her. And I never told her that, but he was definitely scamming her. There's nothing happened in his brain. Did you scan her as well? Yes, and she was wild about him. But she did break up with them. I was very pleased with that, and went on to have a very happy marriage. On the subject of breakups, then, I know that you've also looked at what happens to our brains when people split up. What did you find? Three brain regions linked with craving and addiction become very active when you've been rejected. And of course, you remain in love with the person, love them even more. So we find activity in the Ventual Tick Metal Area, pumping out the dopamine, brain regions linked with feelings of attachment, and one brain region linked with physical pain. And I began to see the real power, the power of this primordial brain system of this basic human drive to love. Well, that brings us on to our next love letter. What becomes of the broken hearted? This tear jerk was emailed in by Gareth, who says, I have recently discovered that not only is there no hope of a future with the love of my life, but she has begun dating again. Oh, Gareth, he goes on, when I discovered this fact, I felt like I'd been physically punched in the stomach. My question is, why do we have such a powerful reaction to these emotional feelings? So is the emotional pain of heartbreak similar to physical pain? Well, there was really only one person I could call on to answer this, the professor of pain Irene Tracy. Oh, I'll listen as I might remember that you as our chief professor of pain, and the last time we encountered each other, well, you lasered me, electrocuted me, you burnt me. I really went first. Yeah. You were great, I have to say, and you seem to enjoy it, I'm not going to lie. Right. Well, that's one way of putting it. No, it's true, in fact. Anyway, so this is like the most scientific, possibly the greatest agony art conversation we've ever had on this program. What about when love ends? We talk about the pain of heartbreak. Is it comparable with other types of, well, real pain? What do we call it? Yeah, it is interesting that socially across many different cultures, we use the language of physical pain, the hurt, and the agony, and we'll use those words in those situations where we are, you know, maybe being dumped, and so you're feeling that sort of rejection. Lots of brain imaging now is being done to try and examine, well, you know, is there an overlap? Is there a difference between the sort of pain that you feel in an emotional state like being rejected or being dumped and being burnt? And although there are absolute differences in how the brain constructs those experiences that are both pain, these in my mind are equal. It's not like one is more real than the other. It's just the origin of how they're produced is different. What is known, which is quite interesting, is some recent work that's looking at just like genetic differences. Let's take oxytocin as a really important one, if it would affective touch and love. The way that that communicates an interaction with the dopamine system, differences in people's genetics, sort of what we call polymorphisms, is like different sort of flavors, if you like, of how that system works for you. Explains differences in people's release of dopamine. Well, I know you're talking my language as well, but that implies that if there are different genetically modulated neurochemical responses to these sorts of informational stimuli, it does mean that it might go some way to explain why some people feel heartache much more than others, or some people fall harder in love than others. I would say absolutely. And so it is, as I say, really exciting work at the moment, I think, trying to relate these very well-understood behavioral experiences that we all have across our cultures and societies to the sort of chemical systems that we've got inside our bodies. Yeah, it's strange, isn't it, that we end up feeling a physical reaction to emotional trauma? Yeah, I only told me that it could be to do with the anxiety and depression that go along with a breakup, both of which we now know can cause physical pain. But you know, in all of this, there is one thing that's slightly bothering me. Can science really hold the answers to love here? Yeah, I wonder if you could actually learn more about love by reading a good novel or listening to cheesy pop songs. Yeah, I mean, you don't hear songs about oxytocin and dopamine, do you? Let's write it. This could be our first curious case's smash hit. I'll leave that one to you. But does all of this science take away some of the mystery of love? This was a question, a final question that we put to today's love guru. No, it definitely doesn't, because we don't say that with other things. We don't say, oh, we mustn't study sadness or depression, because we'll take away the mystery. And yet some people do say this with love, but it's not going to take away the mystery from your own relationship that you start talking about. I don't know what chemicals are happening in your brain. It's still nice. You can know every single ingredient in a piece of chocolate cake. And then you sit down and you eat it and you feel that joy. In the same way, you can be driving a mazzarati and know every single thing about that engine. But when you get in it and put on that accelerator, you feel that thrill. In other words, you can know everything about different brain systems and yet just be like everybody else, for Madden Love. So, Dr. Methford, when it comes to the power of love, can we say casalt? Well, Dr. Frey love activates the addiction centres of our brain and releases dopamine. But so does eating chocolate. And falling in love also dampens our brain's negativity bias. Oxytocin has an important role in social bonding, but we still don't really know why some people and animals are monogamous and some aren't. But we do know that when love ends, pain receptors can be activated in the brain when we are heartbroken. But it turns out that when it comes to the science of love, it's more of an art than science. That final line which I insisted on, even though both Michelle and Hannah asked me to take out the first bit of the science, is a direct quote from Rick and Morty. Which bit? The science of love. It's more of an art than science. That's a direct quote. Yeah. So, okay. The thing is, it's sorry. He's good though. I don't mind when you chew one stuff in. Yeah. Right. But my baseline is that it has to work on one level. Well, I sometimes sneak them past you. That one was okay. That one's not the past. We did sort of catch it and go, that sounds a bit weird. Yeah. And I was like, no, no, it sounds great. It sounds brilliant. And then after we've recorded it and I refuse to do it again, that's when I say that's from Rick and Morty. No, we can't take it out. And now we can't take it out. That's fine. I don't, I mean, I'm trying to think of an example of where you put something in the script. There's something that comes in quite a lot where you're like, you want me to say, I agree with you, my sensei. I was like, you can say, well done, Grasshopper. Yeah, right. Like that stuff has to work on one level, has to work on one level. Just one level. We're talking about obsidian. We don't want to talk about grasshoppers. I'm sorry. It's just, it has become like an obsession. It's your quirk. It's your special quirk. Sometimes I don't even notice that I'm saying these things. And you just say, is this a film reference with a really bored look on your face? I'm like, yes. I still don't understand how you've achieved so much. If you've clearly spent so much time reading song lyrics and watching films. Well, you remember we've had this conversation before when you were doing physics in the 90s instead of going clubbing, I was doing normal things that normal humans do. Wasn't the 90s mate. Wasn't even 16. Yeah, all right. All right, quite fair enough. Okay. So we had a lot of the power of love in there and I won't do the songs again. Our question came from Jessica. She also had a follow up question which was about the healing power of love. Are there any physical benefits that could go beyond the emotional effects? And that was a question that I put to Claudia Hammond. I like this because obviously love is lovely in its own right. But it can also be physically useful. And so there's a famous classic study that was done on this, which is done by a married couple, a keelcock laser and glazer. And there are loads of married couples doing research on love, which I think is sweet and that they do that together. There's quite a few of them. And anyway, they got couples into the lab. And then they got a special thing that created a blister on their arm, a bit like a sort of cigarette burn. And they asked people to discuss things together that they would like to perhaps change about their lives. And if the couples spoke about positive things and talked about things they would like to change together and were supportive of each other, what is really sweet is that they're blister healed faster and healed sooner. Then if they had a very negative conversation about mainly wanting the other person to change, which would be unfortunate. And then it didn't heal as fast. And they actually measured the activity of the natural killer cells. And they did find a difference there. And so the healing process, the immune system was actually different in those who were supportive of their partner and in love. That is quite a striking result. I've got my slightly skeptical face on there. Could it not just be accounted for general well-being if these people were happier than people who were miserable? It could. Yes, we can't really tell which came first. Maybe the healthier people for some reason ended up having better relationships. And also they didn't measure whether they were actually in love or not. Is there a metric? There are questionnaires, self-port questionnaires, where you can answer lots of questions about how in love you are. There's a scale. And there is a scale, yeah. And so there's another couple of done that. And so you can ask people about how in love they are and maybe not get them to compare that with their partner necessarily. If you want them to continue. So I'm not really recommending that you go find the scale. I'm sorry, that's the end of that. Yeah, that's quite like that. Do you? Michelle didn't make us take this test. No, didn't get to cigarette burns in our arm. It's funny, I do genuinely wonder. And I don't mean this in a sort of flaky way. But in terms of just thinking about how things can be accounted for, how we can use data to understand human behaviour. And this question of love, that actually, I am an empiricist and think that all things are understandable and science is a probably the best way to understand most phenomena. I'm not convinced that being able to explain love using a scientific paradigm is the best way to understand it at all. And actually that probably pop songs and poetry and music and culture are better ways. Yeah, but I think that in a way though, that you're suggesting in that, that it's just one thing. And while I agree that when it comes to sort of the, oh, I'm swept off my feet, I'm like, you know, oh, so into it. It's been a long time. Yeah, that was deeply unconvincing, by the way. But anyway, keep going. When it's all of that stuff, then I probably agree with you. But I still think that actually there are certain things that are kind of tangentially related to people's love lives that are quite scientific. Yeah, sure, sure, sure. But I'm wondering if, you know, ultimately we're talking about making a checklist which may be much, you know, really, really long checklist where you can say, well, there are a hundred criteria here, some of which are biological, some of which are psychological. And if I take, if I get to 80, then I'm head over heels and love. It's a different checklist when you've been with someone for a long time, but you're still in love. Is this a useful way of accounting for a lived life? It's going to go with the hard, no. I'm not going to go with the love, too. And you can I tell you something that I do like, though? So actually the very first proper big thing that I ever did outside of just being an academic was to do with love. And it was kind of a private joke that got terribly out of hand, but I did a talk called The Maths of Love that went super, super viral on the internet. And in it, right, my favorite, favorite thing that I still think is really lovely, a good use of science. I was talking about some work that was done by John Gottman, his psychologist and states. And he's spent about, I don't know, 15 years or so, videotaping couples who are in long-term relationships with their permission. With their permission. Okay, because that's a different experiment to other lives. He locks them in a room and gives them a set amount of time and he says, have a conversation about the most contentious issue in your relationship. Right, so he deliberately wants them to sort of provoke an argument. And then what he does with his team is they score everything that happens. So they go back through and every time someone's nice to their partner, they get a positive score and every time someone kind of roll their eyes or, you know, stone walls their partner, they get negative score. Anyway, so the thing that's nice about this, you can get this sort of quantitative view of how an argument evolves over time, which is very lovely. You can collapse that down into a single score for each couple, the overall positive in negatives. And it has this predictive power to it. So the team claim that they can predict whether or not a couple will get divorced within four years, with a 90% guarantee. Oh my lord. That is amazing. But the thing that I really, really like about this is that if you translate those numbers into mathematical description into some equations of the dynamics of how that argument evolves over time, there's something in there called the negativity threshold, which is essentially in the equation. It's how annoying one person has to be before they really, really annoy their partner, before they sort of provoke an extreme reaction in them. And I would totally guess, my guess would have been, right, couples that do the best, they're the ones that leave the other person room to be themselves, they're compromising all the time. Surely it's the people where that threshold is really high. Right? Surely it's the people where it takes an awful lot before they provoke a response in their partner. Turns out though, in the numbers, totally the opposite, totally the opposite. So the people who've got the best chance of long-term success, are actually the ones where this threshold is really low. So they're the people where when something bothers them, they immediately speak up about it. Yeah. Well, maybe not immediately, but they don't sort of go to bed angry. Yeah. They're like, no, this is not okay. You've made me feel bad about this. This behaviour is wrong. Because otherwise, someone needs their cup of tea on the mantelpiece every morning. And you put it downstairs, and then you put it downstairs again, and then you do it again. And the hundredth time, you're like, this cup of tea, explode about the cup of tea. But then you're having a different conversation with your partner, right? Yeah. And is that masking something at some much deeper contempt that you have within that? When you build up. You know, if your biggest problem is your ability to stack the dishwasher in correctly, then I think you're probably doing all right. Although it does. I mean, a dishwasher is a physical thing that bays the laws of physics. Why would you put a bowl on the top shelf facing upwards? That's a hard-to-board land in Surah Tee. I think you could argue that an inability to stack dishwasher is just a single manifestation of a much deeper character flaw. Right, I'm moving this conversation on now. Anyway, you know what, though? I generally avoid talking about love now. People ask me to talk about it all the time, and I tend to avoid it, because the daily mail started referring to me as Dr. Love. Well, you did do a TED talk, aren't you? Which was enormous. Yeah, I know, but I didn't know that loads of people were going to watch it. No, you didn't. That wasn't going to be sort of click-batey at all. Not in the slightest bit whatsoever. Let's just go back to, because there was another question that was a follow-up from Paul Gareth in his heartbreak, because he wanted to know if there was a cure, I think he's mistaken us for some kind of agony-armed. Agony-armed? Get it? Because this is a classic radio for Link here. Irene Tracey, who was part of our painting episode, she is our agony-armed. Yeah? Yeah, you see what I've done? No. No. Do you remember the painting episode? How to work on one level, Adam? One level. Yeah. Pain. I will tell you, solar part. Anyway, no, that is not what Irene said. She said instead this. Okay, Irene, you're our chief professor of pain for the curious cases. What if you could, what would you prescribe for the pain of heartbreak? Oh, wow. That's a tough one. Well, you know, in all forms of pain, you know, if you haven't got something to sort of bring that down, then having positive things. So the sort of anodonia, the inability to enjoy things again and lose your motivation to seek things that are pleasurable is all part of sadly what can happen to chronic pain patients. So learning again to add bits to your life that are positive and pleasurable, so continue to think about the things that you used to enjoy and then go out and try and do them is a way to bring again a counterbalance if you like towards it all being negative and add into that pot or positive things. More positive things. Anodonia, that is a good word, the inability to experience joy and fact fans and film fact fans. Anodonia was the original title to the Woody Allen film, Annie Hall. Oh, that's interesting. Okay. Now, so we talked for the past. Wait, but how was it going to work in the film? Did they say the word in the film? No. Was it going to be one of those words where you don't really understand what it means to the film? I think that's why they probably didn't call it that and instead called it Annie Hall. Which is her name. Wait, what was the word Anodonia? Yeah, what? As in hedonism means joy. Anodonia means inability to experience joy. They've missed a trick there because they could have called it Anodonia. Going back to the songs. So this is going to be another super clunky link, but I'm really enjoying this. We did mention, you said, we don't hear any songs about oxytocin and dopamine. So, Curio's have been amazing over the last 15 series that's sending in their own versions of the theme tune. We want, let's say, a grime rap about oxytocin. I want a power ballad. I want some experimental jazz. Can you tell that really knows your own rhythm music? Grime isn't normally associated with love. Why not? Because I've listened to it. No, they've got songs in there. There's one by Kano called Little Sist. That's really very beautiful. That is true. I think it's about a sister though. Yeah, but it's still in love though, isn't it? Not the oxytocin type that we're talking about here. I think Stormsie's got some about his girlfriend. The birthday girl, that's one. Yes. Can the listeners tell that we don't really know what we're talking about here? Can they? Anyway, that's the request. Send us a love song based on oxytocin and dopamine. And with that, whilst referencing you sending in songs, it's time for... Okay, so that was the classic cure of the week jingle that was sent in by Jeff Perkins about a million years ago. We've also had jingle sent in one from Ian Smith from Edinburgh. If you recall, he did the classic interabang, sort of, what was it, like, mentally new metal? It was amazing. That's what it was. Yeah. Now, you may remember in the episode on Hypnotism where Adam and I were hypnotised, it had very little effect on me, but that wasn't quite true for you, Adam. Was it? Wasn't quite true for you during, while under, while under the influence of his own mind. Adam came up with a remarkable idea for new Marvel comic book hero, Raccoon Man. He has the tale of a beaver. That's right. And a twidly mastage. Big mastage, yes. Big mastage. And he was also Canadian. That was an important detail. Anyway, Ian's come up with the Raccoon jingle, which sounds like this. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. What makes trusty psychic man? What makes you think that you're a real man? What makes trusty psychic man? Marvel the booker. Raccoon fights for truth or science and a curious way. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. Raccoon. I think he's really captured the essence of Raccoon Man there. The Raccoon itself sounded quite a lot like a sneeze. I wonder if that was how it was recorded. It's an accidental sneezing too close to the microphone. I hadn't had Raccoon Man as a sort of noir detective. I thought he was more sort of, you know, Captain America. Raccoon Man, but I was clearly wrong. Keeley wrong. And Ian is right. You also felt mentioned as Ian put it, Raccoon Man's trusty psychic, Math Marvel Number Girl. Math Marvel Number Girl. I like it. I like it. I like it. That's probably the best ever thing I've been cool. So that's from Ian Smith. Now he also adds a PS here. This is a little bit cheeky. Smiley face emoticon. He said, thing is we haven't got very many gold ones left. But BBC budgets mean we can't. It's very limited supply. I think I might have to go and buy some gold nail varnish and start painting over the purple ones. What do we do about this? Because if Ian gets a second curie of the week for Raccoon Man, he's got two different badges. I mean, we're just raising the stakes here. Have you got coin? Have you got coin? He gets gold. It's an ongoing coin. Sorry about this Ian. Raccoon Man is phenomenal. Raccoon. All right. Between us, we found a coin. Michelle had a coin. It's five cents. It has neither heads nor tails. That's defeating the objects of the coin. So it's a number or cathedral. Okay? Right, cathedral. Ian gets a gold badge. Nothing. It's a bit harsh. You can have a second purple one. Ian, I'm your side mate. Can you ready? Yeah, go on. That was a terrible flick. It is number. Second purple badge to Ian is our Curio of the week. Like guys, don't need to be harsh. But the secret motive behind all of this Ian is we just want you to carry on trying. And remember the oxytocin love song love ballad thing that with if you were a dopamine in there, what rhymes with oxytocin? Go sing. Floating. Down the... You can see why we're not putting ourselves forward to write these. Power of love. While Adam thinks on that, you can send us in your question. What's the term always? It's a curious thing. To curious cases at bbc.uk or any songs or entries into the curious cases world records. We're still happy to receive those. All of those are inbox. Is there waiting for your messages? So happy Valentine's day or whatever day you're listening to which statistically is very unlikely to be Valentine's actual day. But next week, next week we've got a real treat for you. What's wrong with your boyfriend? We're doing a special on... A... F... M... C... I didn't actually know what this was until we did the programme. I think you still don't know. Not really. But I like doing this. A lot. It's gone a bit vince and price again hasn't it? See you next week. Bye bye.
