I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC Where did you get that thing from? What the... Do you remember at the end of the last episode of the last series? We decided that the best things to do would be to introduce you with a fanfare. Well you actually demanded it and I sighted that one, you know? You ask? And I deliver. Hang on, if you're fanfare, I want trumpets, I want flags, I want major heads, I guess you do. OK, well good way to put me in my blaze. And we'll be hearing more from the conzo later in this series. MUSIC Well anyway, thank you for that instructions. MUSIC One for you, though. It's up there with one of the greatest moments of my life. MUSIC MUSIC It's a brand new series. Yes, it's brand new series. We've got lots of stuff coming up. We've got some instruments presumably featuring casus. There may be canoes. There may be casus later on in the series. But today we've got a slightly unusual one for you today, because today's question came in from two curios. One of which that we read out on the show, one of which that we didn't get time to. So here is the other email, because it is quite spectacular. This is from Aaron Kenere, who's aged 13 from Bristol. Yeah, so Aaron says, dear doctors, Hannah Fry and Adam Rutherford. Very formal for a 13 year old, we appreciate. I'm sitting so happy. I am a regular listener to your podcast and was binge listening to your show whilst unicycling. And was listening to the deep rich tones of Greg Maaston, aka Mazda Cityman. Do you remember Greg from... Honey to tone. Was it from series one or two? Really early on. Yes, it was one. It was right near the beginning Mazda Cityman, the most amazing voiceover artist. Aaron goes on to say, it reminds me of a stage hypnotist I had seen recently. How does hypnosis and work? Why does it work better on some people than others? How can it be applied to medical use? Or is it all just fake? Like my friend says, I would love to find out. Can I just point out that Aaron there was unicycling while listening to curious cases and thinking about hypnosis? This might be the coolest 13 year old kids that I've ever come across. It brings multitasking to a new, super scientific and unicyclicer dimension. I think I just made that word up. Anyway, we love the fact that you've asked us this question basically to prove your friend wrong. But listen, this is what we're going to do in this show and it's an absolute stonker for reasons you're here. And just a few seconds and you're going to find out whether you or your friend is right. Because I think I thought it was fake. I definitely thought it was fake. But as you'll see, there's a rather surprising result. Welcome back to the brand new series of curious cases. Yes, over the next six episodes, we are going to tackle quandaries big and small, astronomical and anatomical. Or sent in by you to curiouscases at VBC.co.uk And today's topic is hypnosis, suggested by two curious Aaron Kenere, a 13 from Bristol and Peter Jordan, a 24 from Manchester, who asks... Is hypnosis real? And if so, how does it work? Does it have any practical uses and which of Hannah and Adam is most susceptible? Right, knowing this programme, I think I can predict what is going to happen. Well, maybe. But before we started recording this programme, both Adam and I, we were very skeptical about this whole thing. Neither of us thought that we were susceptible at all to being hypnotised. But by the end of this programme, one of us will be proved completely wrong. Let's just wait and see what happens. Let's see, yes. So, it all started when we walked into the studio to meet stage hypnotist Ben Daly. Oh, hello. Nice to meet you. Nice to meet you. Nice to meet you. We're really nervous, right? Right. It's understandable. But honestly, you're going to have an amazing hour. So just relax and enjoy it. We're just going to talk for a little bit first of all. Hypnosis works on the power of suggestion. So, the hypnotist's role is to relax you into a state of mind where you're open to my suggestions, and then present the suggestions in such a way that they accept them. They start nice and relaxing, and then I start suggesting you into a state of trance. And once you're in a state of trance, I'll give you more active suggestions, depending on the depth of trance that you can achieve. If you're ready to start, feet reed to firmly on the floor, start taking deep breaths in through your nose. Hold and out through your mouth. Now, we're not actually allowed to play you the hypnotic induction in case any of you listeners are highly susceptible. Yeah. I guess it's not safe, you know, if you're driving. No. Perhaps. But suffice to say it involved lots of deep breathing and some counting. Number seven, that feeling now up to your shoulders down across your neck, down further, number eight, into your stomach. And then there was some relaxing. You're no longer in the studio. You're going to pitch yourself now on a beach. A nice, relaxing, comfortable, calm, warm beach. Nice and relaxed. What a beautiful day. Now, I really liked that bit because I imagine myself very clearly on my favourite beach in the world, which is in all brine, suffoc. Well, each sit their own because I was imagining being on my honeymoon in the seashells. Right. Well, you know, all bras is own particular glamour. It certainly does. Now, we are going to come back later to find out which one of us succumbs to the power of suggestion. Yes, but what is it that makes some people more susceptible than others? Devon Tahun is a psychologist from Goldsmiths University in London, who studies how hypnosis actually works. And I started by asking him what proportion of people are capable of being hypnotised. So we've known since the introduction of standardized hypnotic suggestibility of scales and late fifties that anywhere from about 10 to 15% of the population is considered to be highly suggestible or highly hypnotizable. And does that mean that the people in this category are malleable or that they are... I don't know, they're suckers. There's maybe a pinch of that. We have to be cautious. So there's no evidence that suggestibility is linked to gullibility or tiniivite. And there's no link between intelligence and suggestibility either. What do you think that makes people more suggestible? So I would say the best evidence we have is a personality trait known as absorption. So somebody's like reading a novel and just getting so engaged in the novel that two hours will pass and they won't be aware of it. Going to a concert and getting so immersed in the music that you kind of lose awareness of what's going on around you. These types of classic episodes that we all have from time to time, but there are people that have these very regularly, maybe even on a daily basis. We suspect that these people are more highly suggestible. So if like 10 to 15% of people fall into that highly suggestible category, presumably there were people who are what? Not hypnotizable at all? Yes, that's again about 10 to 15%. I'm in that category for example. I mean, I suspect I am too. I approach these sorts of situations somewhat cynically. Yes, that's tricky because your beliefs and your expectations do influence your response to hypnosis. So people that really expect of a very strong pronounced response, more often than not will. But it's not a perfect relationship such that you will occasionally find people that are really quite skeptical. They can end up being quite responsive because they seem to have the underlying ability. So even artists skeptics like us could be hypnotized? Yeah, although as he said, it doesn't mean that the people who are susceptible are weak willed. Did he say that exactly? Anyway, let's see where we both lie on that susceptibility scale. Let's go back to our hypnotic encounter. Hannah, when you wake up you will find you have forgotten how to think, count and say the number seven. It's not that the number seven is missing from your mind. There's not a number between six and eight that you can't recall. But the number seven never existed in the first place. You're going to wake up on the count of three, one, two and three. Hi Hannah, nice to see you. How are you feeling today? You have a nice day? Yeah. What do you do for a living, Hannah? Mathematician. You're a mathematician so you've got to be pretty good at maths then. I consider it one of my strengths. One of your many no doubt. Obviously counting is the first thing that you do when it comes to maths. You can count quite easily. I'd say so. How many fingers and thumbs do you have in total? Ten. Hold your hands up for me. I'm just going to touch each one and just count them up for me. So we've got one. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven. Right, so it's not you then. No, it's not. You know what they, for a second. I did think about just playing along, but then I remembered that I'm actually just a really bad actor. I wouldn't have been able to get away with it. No, I agree with that. You are a bad actor. I do think I was mildly hypnotised at the start there because he did this thing where he made us feel like our hands were glued together. And that kind of worked for me, but then, well, just didn't last. Yeah, that bit definitely worked for me because when I put my hands together and he asked us to split them apart, I found that I didn't. It was really hard to actually split my hands apart. Wasn't the only bit that worked. I knew it was it. Yes, well, I guess we'll come to that in a minute. But first, a bit of history. Franz Anton Mesmer, pioneer in the use of mesmerism in the 18th century in Europe. Right from the start, the technique delivered flamboyant showmanship and curative promise. The fashion spread to Victorian London, where the highly respected professor of medicine, John Ellison, conducted demonstrations at University College Hospital. Famous names from Michael Faraday to Charles Dickens came to watch him lol his patients into a trance, as Wendy Moore, author of the mesmerist, describes. In particular, there were two sisters, the Okie sisters Jane and Elizabeth Okie who were 15 and 17. They'd been admitted to the hospital with epilepsy originally. And as they were mesmerised on a daily basis, their epilepsy actually reduced. But people were far more fascinated by the bizarre behaviour that they exhibited. So they were poor working class girls, normally very meek and docile. But when they put into a trance, as it was called, their personalities would be completely transformed. So they would sing and dance and joke and sometimes they would swear at the audience. Sometimes they'd go and sit on a man's knee, other times they would actually attack somebody. So people were utterly fascinated by this behaviour. But also they could lift incredibly heavy weights. They had pins stuck in their flesh and would sit there without any pain. And they would withstand an electric shock for up to three minutes. That does sound pretty dramatic. So what did the medical community think about this? Well, opinion was split to be honest. No one was sure whether the Okie girls were just acting or whether it was a trick. But eventually, you know, the medical community they turned against Ellison and mesmerism in general. However, stage hipnosis found a different home in sensational musical acts and in order of your shows. And talking of which. Here we go. I think that we'd better get back to your experience with stage hipnetus Ben Dali. Adam, I'm now talking to you again. Because we're going to experience a little bit of time travelling. I'm going to take you back about one hour Adam to when you just stepped into this studio for the first time. Before you've experienced this hypnotic journey that we're undertaking. In your mind, we are having this conversation for the very first time. You have all of your prior awareness and understanding. But you cannot tell me anything about your co-presenter. You've forgotten her name, how long you've been working together. However, because this is a live interview. You don't want to seem ignorant so you will have to make up your answers and blag it. You're going to wake up on the count of three. One, two, and three eyes open. Where do I wait? Hello, Adam, isn't it? Hi. I'm Ben, nice to meet you. Hi. So thank you for having me on the show today. So we're here to talk about hipnosis. Do you think you can be hypnotised, Adam? I don't, I don't, no, I don't think, I think I don't think I can. Okay. You get on with Adam quite well, don't you? Yeah, I think so. How long have you been working together a while? How long would you say? Three years. About three years. Does that sound about right? About three years or so? Right, ages, isn't it? Yeah, you two must get on so well too, but together for so long. What's his name again? Adam. What's her name again? And sleeping all the way down, drifting down, relaxing down, well done, Adam, her name's Hannah, by the way. Now, listen, is it is a shame that you couldn't see his face then, because Adam, you genuinely looked embarrassed and confused, maybe a bit perturbed as well? Yeah, look, that is exactly it. And I actually still feel a little bit embarrassed. I couldn't understand why I couldn't remember your name. It was like there was just a piece of jigsaw that wasn't there. But let me tell you, it was actually hilarious. Thanks. I enjoyed it greatly. So as part of this apology in order to work out what the hell happened to me, I went back to hypnosis research at Devon Tahun. The scenario was that Hannah's name had been erased from my memory. And it was a very weird sensation, and I'm saying her name with ease now. But being able to remove a memory like that, is that it recognized phenomenon? Yes, yes. So it's typically referred to as suggested amnesia. And so that's been known about for well over 100 years. That's a very difficult suggestion to respond to, though, typically. It's something that should only really be observed and very highly suggestible in noodles. One kind of dominant theory of hypnosis is that you're actually acting it out. So that highly suggestible in noodles will use normal cognitive control to suppress pain or alter their perception or whatever it might be to tell a narrative like you were doing. But they convinced themselves that the hypnotist is controlling them. I would see as a skeptic, that was part of my thought process. I kept thinking, am I putting this on? But I didn't feel like I was performing. I wasn't acting it. So acting it out usually implies that you're kind of doing it voluntarily, right? Just faking, basically. And that occurs sometimes in stage hypnosis, certainly. But in this context, all things being equal, it seems like you had a genuine experience. It doesn't seem like you were just playing along. Okay, so if you think that hypnosis can have real effects on a certain subsection of people, where do you think the best evidence is for it being an effective actual treatment? If I was to say what clinical phenomenon, the evidence is best for, I would say it's actually for treating and managing pain. Hypnosis is used in surgeries where they cannot give a local anesthetic and so they can rely on the use of suggestion, but they're not massive effects, right? And this doesn't work with every condition or every symptom either. So it's not going to be effective for everyone just like stage hypnosis is not going to be effective for everyone, but it can be valuable, but all things being equal, I would say you're probably going to be benefit from hypnotherapy more than Hanout, for example. As you heavily demonstrated that Adam, but you know, as much fun as it was, eventually, it was time to bring things to an end. Finally, wide awake on the count of five. You're all right there, Adam. Yeah, yeah. Do you really forget my name? I was looking at you and I know you. That was really weird. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to whether hypnosis is real and who is more susceptible, can we say K-solved? Well, yes, Dr. whatever your name is and yes, the answer is me. 10 to 15% of people are highly hypnotizable and about the same number are pretty much immune. If you are susceptible, possibly the most effective use of hypnotherapy is for managing pain. But not for forgetting your colleague's name. I'm really, really sorry, Hanout. And in time, I will learn to forgive you, whoever you are. Alright, so that was, that was super weird. Of all of the things that we have done together and separately and mostly to me, I think that was the one that freaked me out the most because I totally didn't think that was going to work. I know what they, something else happened while Adam was being hypnotized, that I think was well, frankly, even more hilarious. Lots of you may know that Adam is quite a gigantic superhero fan, both comics and films, and have a little listen to what Ben Daly got him to do while he was being hypnotized. Adam, in a moment's time, you're going to wake up and find that you've been given an incredibly exciting opportunity. So in the tragic passing of Stan Lee, Marvel Studios needs an idea for a brand new superhero, and they've come to you. This is the most exciting moment of your life to pitch a new superhero to the studio. Hanout will be the director of a brand new Marvel film. I will be Marvel head Kevin Feige, and we're going to ask you some questions about your superhero, not your head to confirm that you understand good. When I ask you questions, Adam, you must respond in a deep, low-pitched voice. And when Hanout asks you questions, you're going to respond in a squeaky, high-pitched voice. You will not really be aware of the change in your pitch, not your head to confirm that you understand. Adam, you're going to wake up in the most exciting interview of your life on the count of three. One, two, three eyes open wide awake. Hi, Adam. Thank you so much for joining us here today, Marvel Studio Head Office. How are you feeling? You're right. Yeah. Cool. So this is Hannah. She's going to be directing the movie. Hannah, would you like to grease Adam? Hi, Adam. Hi. I'm so Adam. You've come up with a... You're okay, that, Adam. I know this is a tense moment for you. So you've come up with a brand new superhero. What's your superhero called? Raccoon. Ah, Hannah. What are their superpowers? He... Has the powers of a Raccoon. So what exactly would those powers of a Raccoon be, Adam? He's got a very big tail, like a... Badger. Okay. So a Raccoon with a Badger's tail? Yes. Fun. How did they become a superhero? I think there was a spider involved. But I don't know why. Okay. Could you tell me a little bit about the background of the Raccoon? Do you come from Earth? You come from Canada. Okay. So it's a Canadian Raccoon. Yes. What do they look like? He's got a very hairy face. And like a mustache. And it is the tail, the tail is the thing. Great. Okay. Adam, thank you very much. We'll take your pitch under advisement. Just eyes on me for a moment. Going back to sleep on 3123. Sleeping all the way down. Oh God, that's just so terrible. I sound like... I feel like I have to give this from context. I love the fact that in the deepest dark, there's depths of your brain. Really, your heart brings secret ambitions for a Raccoon. She's such a bad tail. I mean, it sounds Canada. That's the first time I've heard that back since we actually did it. And I mean, it just sounds like I'm making it up. But the thing is that when you're in there, I was saying these words were kind of out of mouth. And half of my brain was just going, What are you talking about? I mean, was it convincing to you? You kind of speaking high and having a deep voice and a high voice. I think it sort of did work the first couple of times. But when you spoke to me and looked at me straight in the face and said, Hi, or whatever, whatever it was, the first response was, It was almost like something had escaped from me or mouth. And you were desperately sort of trying to kind of claw it back in or weren't sure of that. That's exactly what it felt like as well. And you know, you're totally conscious during the whole experience. I can hear everything that was being said. And you know, when you were doing your counting, and I was, I had my eyes closed and my head down. And when you said the number seven, I kind of chuckled. That was quite funny because I knew, you know, you're so stubborn. And you're so, so, you know, such a control freak. I'd like being in control and I'd like numbers. And when you said that, I just thought, yeah, totally get this. Because you absolutely know what's going on in the room. So when, when Raccoon came out, you know, a man inside my head just went, I'm sorry, who just said that? Because that's ridiculous. And as a superhero fan, seriously, Raccoon Badger Guy from Canada was the best I could come up with. I think one thing that we can say for sure is that his nose is not going to be an effective weapon to make yourself more creative. I mean, really not because as well, there is a Raccoon character in the Marvel Universe. Okay. Has he got a Badger tail? No, he's got Raccoon's tail. He's not actually a Raccoon. He's sort of alien thing. He does have a key. He's got a mustar so kind of. No, but Wolverines from Canada. And Spider-Man was bitten by a spider. So one was the most derivative mishmash of rubbish I've ever come across. I mean, I might think that's nonsense, that thing. Because, you know, Ben Dali was very, he went at great lengths to say what a great sign of our personality it would be if we could manage to be hypnotised. And while I don't necessarily disagree with that, I also think that they're trying to sort of butter you up so that you are less resistant perhaps. Well, yeah. Okay. So if I came in and said, you know, people who are susceptible to hypnosis are more likely to be dull, unimaginative and quite unattractive. You'd be like, well, that's not going to happen then, is it? So I think this is the key thing because actually although that didn't work on me with the sort of stage hypnosis there, I have done stuff before, like hypnobethr thing, which is where you try and use the more therapeutic side of hypnosis to get yourself into kind of a relaxed state so that, you know, when you're giving birth, the pain isn't quite so strong. And I think actually a lot of this comes down to the motivation that you have, the sort of the incentives that you have to kind of let your brain go with it. Yeah. And I think we talked about that with Devon Tahun. And so on stage, there is an element of playing along. And I kept sort of questioning whether I was playing along or not. I should also tell you a bit for about three days afterwards. I just kept getting a apologise message from Adam on WhatsApp. I'm really sorry, I forgot your name. I'm really sorry. He's still kind of burnt me as well. I still feel when we're listening to that back, I do feel slightly embarrassed because he, that is embarrassing to forget. You know, he's quite offensive. How can you just erase that? You're my friend. I know. It's okay though. I have to say also though, I did find Bendali quite impressive, not just because he managed to hypnotise you, but also because in sort of the warm-up he was trying to convince us that he was this authority, I guess, that he had these abilities. And one of the tricks that he did to do that, I think was one of the most impressive tricks I've ever seen, have a listen. Have you ever seen an invisible deck of playing cards, Hannah? Weirdly no. Good, I have one in my pocket. Tadah, will you take the deck for me and shuffle the cards up please? Sure thing. Don't worry about taking them out the box. We're there with invisible decks of cards. I am actually extremely good. I'm particularly impressed. All right. Take a card, slide it out to the side. Don't look at it. Okay, hang on, I'm just going to fan them out. Just focus right here on the spiral in the back of my business card. You could have picked any card in the deck. Could have been a red card like a heart or a diamond or a black card could have been a spade, possibly a club. Could be an odd number like a 3, 5, 7, 9 or even like a 2, 4, could be a 6 possibly a 6 and 8. Or a 10, it might have been a pitch card like a Jack or a Queen. Might have been a King or an Ace. Have a look at your card. Tell that this one is what you picked. I'm currently holding nothing. Listen, just say you're all right. Have a look at your card, Hannah. It's the Ace of Spades. No, rubbish. Okay, take the Ace of Spades, turn it upside down, shove it back into the deck, shuffle the cards up, put them back in the box. Okay, okay, okay, okay, okay. And chuck them in my pocket. Okay, hang on, I'm going to give them the box first. They're not neat. I can see your imagination, we're going to have a blaster going on. That's great, perfectly done. On the count of three, the magic words, please, curious cases. One, two, three. Curious cases. Curious cases. And with a bit of luck, the deck becomes real, isn't that great? It's almost like you had another pocket. Almost. It should be one card in the deck facing the opposite direction. Remember what card you picked? No, you didn't. What was your card, Hannah? Ace of Spades. Oh, look at that. That's very clever. That's very good. Thank you. And it's a real physical card this time. That's a technique called waking hypnosis. So obviously the cards are ready to end over. I just have to work out the best way to get you to say my target card. And you just did that? Yes. You just did that. Yes. And she did it. Yes. Most people do. Did I? Did it right before you even started? You don't know when I started, Hannah. When he tells how you did it afterwards. Sure. Thank you. I mean, I've told you already. He touched you quite a lot and said things and poached you particularly. You were not ignoring all of that. But I was truly trying to follow what you were saying when you were doing particularly poke bits. And you didn't say the Ace of Spades. No, I know he said it last. He said Ace last. I go through the suits and then I go through the card values. Sometimes I do it the other way around. Hannah strikes me as a latency person rather than a recency person. So I said Spades last and I said Ace is last. I also think she's second-guessing me. So when I wanted her to say the Ace, I kind of shook this as if to say no and she took that as a yes. It was truly, truly impressive that. I still don't understand how he did it. No, that's because you approach these things so cynically that you actually can't stop yourself from being a little bit sarcastic. And even though I am equally skeptical and don't believe in anything supernatural whatsoever, I just love magic. Yeah. And the wow factor of him doing that, just, you know, there was no card. You picked from an invisible imaginary pack, a card, imaginarily turned it upside down in an imaginary pack. And then he produced the real physical pack with the same card turned round. That's brilliant. It was really good. It was really good. Yeah. Ben Daly is certainly a wizard. I don't think I could be him and not use those powers for evil. And I also don't. What would you use them for? Really trust him. Well, I can't tell you that because it would be evil reasons. If I ever meet Ben Daly again, I just, I just don't know whether I can trust that guy. I know. Imagine if you're a really good friend to someone who could do that. I mean, well, you wouldn't be able to lie. Would you? If you know, I'm sorry, I'm late. I actually just left the house late. Okay, fine, I'm sorry. I was sleeping. Or if you were in a bar with him, he's like, who's round is it? It's my round again. That's weird the way I go to the pub with you end up buying all the drinks all night. But it seems to be fair somehow. I think you don't have this overwhelming sensation to be generous. So odd. Listen, that whole experience, I know you found it funny. I found it very weird. And I just want to say again, I'm really sorry. I forgot your name. Actually, one of the things that we didn't play is that he asked me if you had any children. And I said I didn't know, which I do know. But you did know that I had a dog called Molly. What's going on there? How did I remember your dog and not your daughter? It's important. All the key facts. Anyway, you know what? I think it's time for Curio the Week. Rather for the prize Curio of the Week. Now, we've had lots of feedback from the last series. Especially the stressful scheme. That prompted lots of letters. The stressful scum did indeed. Now, the moment I'm just ignoring that. So we've got a few contenders for Curio of the Week. Starting with Chris Bamberer, who tweeted this. And I am not going to even vaguely attempt to read this out. I know, but I can't do it either. I only had one lesson. You did it right. This is this is on you, Hannah. I go on. So this was the episode in which I had a lesson of how to speak Jordi. Now, in my defence, I had one lesson. And it was about four months ago. But Chris Bamberer has written in. And he's written it so brilliantly in like a Georgian. Just read it. You procrastinating. You're playing for time. Hannah Petta just heard. No way. Hannah Petta, I just heard you as an Adam's episode. It's spelled in the... What's the word? Herd, it's spelled H-O-R-D. An episode. An episode. Epi-I-S-O-A-D. You're an Adam's episode. And as a full-blooded Jordi, I was re-thripped. You did champion Vonny Las. As seniors, born for lovely start-each-y, you're going to put a piece, budden. Brilliant. I think that's really good. I can't... I can't... I can't work now. I need to practice it more in the shower. So that was one. We also got a letter in from Mary Robinson. Here are a few notes as an American who listens to too much BBC. I'm from Texas, but no, I don't have the accent. But yes, I say y'all. Actually, I think you should say this next one. Oh, yeah. This was the bit about Fortnite. Me discovering that Americans often didn't say Fortnite. And that when I did say Fortnite, they thought I came out of a J-Nost in a while. So she says, Mary says, we only know this word from studying Shakespeare in high school. So it sounds funny and archaic to hear it in everyday conversation. A similar word is penultimate. If you use it here, you have to explain what it means and if you want things, you have to explain. But what are you using instead of penultimate? One before the end. We are spits, bitmatches, isn't it? It's a good sketch. I just agree. And aren't Americans thinking that we're a bit pretentious, isn't that? Why we talk like this. What we live for. Yes, exactly. I entirely agree. Well, that was Mary's penultimate paragraph. Her final paragraph was, we use hammer's penultiation. Sorry about that, Adam. I like Mary a lot. Until the next sentence, we rarely put cream or jam on them. What? It's just the dryness in your mouth. What would, how? What would you do with them then? Usually we flavor them and or put fruit in them and then eat them plain. What madness is this? I'm afraid you're wrong. Well, I'm sorry, Mary, but you started so well. The final contender out of the now short list of two for carrying the weight. Sorry, Mary, we're only kidding. He's Glenn Saunders from Christchurch in New Zealand. I won't do the accent. He said, You had a nice piece on accents and dialects and referred to New Zealand. Adam. Adam, I say, Adam is what my Kiwi aunt refers to. I'm a pomp who's been living here happily since 2002, but the accent takes a while to get used to. Being economical folk, all of our sounds become the same. So we use the inter-Island fairy to get between the toenail and all of us. Fairy. Fairy. Fairy. Fairy. Fairy. Yeah. More intriguingly, if the Kiwi speaker offers you six, it might be six, sacks, sacks, socks, socks. Or an interesting combination of several. Six, six, six, six, six. Oh, that's... That could be really confusing. You didn't. You want how many socks? Or sacks? He says, The look in their eye tends to give it away. That's good. Right. That is really confusing. When I was out in New Zealand a couple of years ago, did you ever read the books Harry McClary from Donaldson's Dairy? Of course. Classic Children's books. They're completely brilliant. And they're about this dog who lives in Donaldson's Dairy and gets up to various pranks. They're by Lynn Doddley, who's a Kiwi writer. When I went out to New Zealand, and I don't know how we got talking about it. But Donaldson's Dairy is not a dairy. In New Zealand, dairy is not places where you get milk. What? They're like news agents where you buy things like beer and crisps. Hang on, are you saying that Harry McClary is from a news agent? Yes. It doesn't really work as well. It doesn't at all. But then what do they call dairy? What? Why is they called a dairy? I don't know. Can you buy milk in a dairy? I didn't buy any milk when I was in New Zealand. It wasn't a thing that happened. Should we go back to the matter in hand and choose cura? I think can we give you a dairy McClary? I think it has to be either Glenn Saunders from Grassers New Zealand. Or hear me, Clary from Donaldson's team. I think let's go for Glenn Saunders. There you go. Well done, Glenn. You are cura over the week in a slightly random way. I'm Greg Fertt and I'm hosting a new Radio 4 podcast called The Best Things Since Sliced Bread. I'm on a bunk busting mission to find out if the latest life-changing products and social media crazes really are all they're cracked up to be. Each week I'm joined by a special guest and leading scientific experts to run a whole host of wonder products through the evidence mill. Blair Bay's turn cheese enthusiast Alex James will come in to discuss the fizzy drink de jour, kombucha. I've got rapper, actor and podcast pro, scrubious pip looking at what we can do to beat the winter bugs. And we kick off with actress writer and beauty blogger Rebecca Humphries and we turn our BDI evidence towards the beauty industry. Separating marketing hype from hard science is the best thing since slice bread. Listen on the BBC Sounds app.
