I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC Hello, the Curios. A tale of true heartache for you today. Yeah, but not like that. Not like that. In another way. In a very biological and medical way. MUSIC Today's question concerns a matter of heartache. It comes from listener Keith Williams, who sent in to QSKZBBC.co.uk and he writes, To the Good Doctors, this one is for Dr Rutherford, I feel. I've spent the majority of my life as a couch potato. What? MUSIC Hi. And then two years ago, I decided that to avoid an early grave, I should take my health seriously and put some effort into being fitter. Yes, well, Keith, good rescue there. I feel your pain. Maybe I should continue with this. OK, the eggs and pains I have suffered after hours in the gym have been in muscles. I never knew existed. Every part of my body has ached at some point except my heart. Why is that? My heart is significantly fitter now than it was and it works very hard when I'm at the gym. So why doesn't it ever ache? The following day, like my legs or arms do. An excellent question and good on you, Keith, by the way. Yes, so I can identify with both the couch potatoing and the achiness. Middle age is just an irretrievable slide into creakiness, isn't it? No, if you say so, I'll tell you when I get there. Yeah. But anyway, I do like a nice bit of anatomy and I'm very partial to a bit of sport too. Perfect. So I will observe you from the sidelines occasionally, sharing you one. Very good. To understand why different bits of our bodies cause us different types of grief, we need to start with the anatomy. The father of anatomy is widely regarded as the Greek genius Claudius Galenus, aka Gaelum. He was responsible for humanity's understanding of bodily structure for over a thousand years. In the second century, he was doctor to the Roman Emperor's Marcus Aurelius, Commodus, and Septimus Severus. Echeverus. Ten points to Gryffindor. Galen performed his deceptions in ancient Rome. His work was to guide doctors for about the next thousand years or so. However, one small problem. Because there was a huge taboo around dissecting people back then, quite a lot of his work, shall we say, didn't quite stand the test of time? When later anatomists, such as Vassalius, started to examine actual people first hand in the 16th century, they discovered Galen's anatomy made some pretty big assumptions. Likewise. Well, most of it was largely based on monkeys. Barbury macaques, to be precise. Okay. All right. I mean, I'm not the biologist here, but there are quite significant differences between humans and monkeys, like, I don't know, a tail. Well, actually, Barbury's, they only have a tiny vestigial sort of leftover tail. Still a tell. It's definitely true. To be fair, though, Galen didn't base all of his anatomy on monkeys, though. Oh, well, that's good. So he did do some work on you. He absolutely did. He did some very important invasive investigation on gladiators. Well, that sounds more like it. Yes, but they weren't dead at the time. Sure. I mean, a lot of them were dead quite soon afterwards. I'm not sure I'm winning this argument to be perfectly honest. Anyway, look, I think maybe it'd be best if we just skipped forward to the modern era. I would certainly appreciate that. Okay, so fast forward to the modern era. And the anatomy is a bit better at this now. So not only do they know where all the muscles are and what they do, but physiologists can now zoom into the structure of muscles to find out how they actually work, how the individual fibers contract. So these bundles of fibers in muscles are called sarcom ears, and they're crammed with tiny microscopic fibers made of proteins called myocin and actin. Okay, Hang on, there's too many words in biology. So muscle fibers, those are the sarcom ears. Yep. And they're made from proteins called myocin and actin. Pretty much exactly right. Tell you what, though, Dr. Mitch Lomax is a sports scientist at the University of Portsmouth. She helps actual Olympic swimmers get faster, and here she is telling me how those fibers turn into muscular movement. If you're looking at what we call those myofilaments, which are the actin and myocin, that's the good stuff. So that's what allows that contraction to happen. You are talking billions and billions in a single muscle fiber, and you can have several thousand up to a million muscle fibers in a muscle. It really depends on the size of the muscle. I can give you an example if you like that might help you visualize how this contraction process happens. So let's imagine you're standing in a library, and you're standing in an aisle and you've got the left hand side, a massive bookshelf, and then to the right hand side, you've got another massive bookshelf. Now let's imagine that these bookshelves are on rollers, so they can be pulled closer together, or they can be moved further apart. And you've been tasked to move these bookshelves closer together. Brilliant, but you're not allowed to use your legs. So if you're standing still, you extend your arms, and you try and grab the bookshelves, but unfortunately you can't, so you've got a problem. Luckily, someone's come along and they've tied some rope around the left hand bookshelf, and they've tied some rope around the right hand bookshelf. So you can now grab those ropes, and you can tug using your hands, and the bookshelves will move slightly closer together. You then release the rope, and then you move your hands further up the rope, and you do another tug. So in this example, you are the Mayasin. Your hands are those Mayasin heads. The bookcases are the Z-discs, so those separate the sarcomies, and the rope is the actin. So by constantly grabbing on those ropes, tug in, the bookshelves move closer together. You release the rope, grab higher up on the rope, tug the bookcases move closer together, and that's what's going on, but that's what's going on along billions of those myofilaments. That's the action that we see. Okay, that is pretty impressive. It's like one person on their own might not feel like they can do very much, but if you get thousands of them together in a big protest, it can make a big change. Yes, sort of muscular democracy, if you will. So that analogy describes just one type of muscle movement, though, so specifically where muscles are getting shorter, when you contract your bicep, it's called a concentric contraction. The one we're probably more interested in in answering Keith's question about pain, is a different one, and that's called eccentric contraction, which actually lengthens muscles. Hang on, Adam, did you just get us back on track to answering the question? On track, like a pamphlet is Mitch. Now, it's the eccentric muscle contractions, and that basically just means your muscles lengthening. That's the type of muscle contraction that is associated with what we call muscle saunas to a greater extent. So when you get this aching, you've basically got two types. You've got that immediate pain that you get after exercise, maybe during, but that goes quite quickly. Normally within a few hours, it's the delayed onset muscle saunas, which we call doms, that's problematic. And the reason for that is because that actually damages the muscles. Now, as you'll know, if you've had doms, you don't get doms straight away. So doms takes a couple of days to really peak. So normally about 48 to 72 hours after exercise, an exercise that's been of sufficient intensity or volume to damage your muscle, that's when you get that peak pain. And then it gradually dissipates. So hopefully after about five, maybe seven days, that pain will go. Give me a specific example of an eccentric action on a specific muscle that people can relate to. Let's take the biceps, for example. So let's imagine we're holding a weight in our hand and our elbow is flexed. The biceps appears to be shorter than if our elbow is extended. That's a concentric muscle contraction. Now imagine we're lower in that weight. So as we lower the weight, the elbow gets straighter. And if you look at your biceps, it appears to get longer. That's an eccentric muscle contraction. You put mentioned, when we talk about exercise and we talk about that pain in the ach, generally that's associated with the assumption that you're doing something good, that you're building muscle and you're building strength. But you're saying what this is damaging, this is bad. No, and this is where it's interesting because it's a double-edged sword. Because the reason we get doms is because of that muscle injury, but the way in which your muscles get bigger and stronger starts with muscle injury. You have to break the affected muscle down so that additional contractile material can be laid down. So muscle injury, yes, it's bad in the sense that you're going to get doms, you're not going to feel great. But that is a required process for then laying down new muscle tissue within your muscle fibers and hence you getting stronger. Okay, so when people say no pain, no gain or when Arnie goes, you've got a field to burn. When working out really intense, that is actually in the long term, contributing to building up new muscles. Yes, if you're trying to improve the strength, you're trying to improve the size of those muscles. Yes, you need to create that, that ultra-structural muscle damage. And actually, eccentric contractions are better at doing that than either concentric or isometric contractions. But, and this is an important point, it doesn't mean that every time you do eccentric actions, you're going to get muscle damage. That's not the way it works. But if you want to maximize that muscle damage, then eccentric contractions can help you do that. Okay, so muscles in our legs and our arms and even in our faces. Yes, they're called skeletal muscles, yes. Well, it all works, then it allows us to run and jump and lift because at microscopic at a subcellular level, these teeny tiny filaments of proteins, they slide over each other, collectively causing the whole muscle to contract or lengthen. And if we just moderately overdo that movement in our skeletal muscles, like not even a major renter in injury, just a serious workout, we do a little bit of damage and maybe you can't walk downstairs without Wednesday. Exactly, a couple of days later, it's your cells are repairing all of that damage and the muscles actually get stronger, correct? But as Keith says, we don't usually feel pain like delayed onset muscle sonnus in our hearts, even after we've exercised. So I asked a consultant cardiologist, Rohinge Francis about why this is. But before we hear from him, Adam, I need to do me one little favor. So am I going to enjoy this? It's all in the name of science. I know it always is. Okay, so what will you do? I want you to raise your non-dominant hand, the one that you don't write with. It's my left hand. Okay, check. Now with your other hand, use your first two fingers, just find your pulse in your neck. Okay, got it. I'm going to say just do that there. Yep. I am still alive. You're de heros. Now, what will you do is to start opening and closing your raised hand fully. So roughly in time with your pulse, if you could. And I want it properly clenched. None of this sort of half heartedness. Oh, I'm doing it. I mean, this is kind of weird. Because they try to squeeze blood all the way around your body. Yep, imagine it's like a little heart in your hand. Okay, so you carry on doing that while Rohinge tells me about how harsh muscle cells are different to skeletal muscle cells. In comparison to skeletal muscle, for example, heart cells are a lot more efficient. They have denser supply of mitochondria. So they're extremely energetic cells that they will consume quite a significant portion of the oxygen supplied by your blood, even at rest. In a resting state, the heart is working very hard the whole time. We're not aware of that. But the heart is going the whole time. And this is because the cells can just continue beating. And you don't feel that fatigue that you would get from your skeletal muscles when your ATP or energy levels are depleted fairly rapidly. Okay, I can confirm depletion. Please, can I stop this? This is really hard. No, you've got to wait one second because I need to remind you of what mitochondria are. Mitochondria are popularly referred to as the powerhouse of the cell. I always think power station is a more accurate description. They are the site for cellular respiration. So they are the structures that create ATP for us to use to power all our cellular metabolism. I've definitely run out of ATP in my hand. What's ATP? Can I stop doing this with my hand? Only once you've finished this bit. What's ATP? It's the stuff that provides energy for muscle movement. It is really difficult to explain complex biochemistry when you're doing this. ATP is kind of like a currency of energy in our bodies. We make it, we use cells, use it. This is really hard work. And here's an interesting fact. We make and use our entire body weight in ATP every single day. All right, you can finish now. That was hard. How's your hand, Phil? It's like limp depletion. Yeah, it's kind of cool, isn't it? That next time that was horrible. You know what's even cooler? This. If you put a culture of heart cells in a petri dish, even just a small number, they will spontaneously start to beat. And they will also synchronize with each other. And this is quite unique to heart cells. They just have this inbuilt tendency to beat. And so the heart is the first structure that forms in utero. And from very early on in our embryological development, there is a primitive heart which starts beating. And then gradually as we develop in the womb, the heart becomes more complex and eventually forms the four chambered structure that we're familiar with. And throughout the heart cells are just beating. I didn't know this. I didn't know that if you get a little cluster of heart cells and put them in a petri dish, they just start beating automatically. That's extraordinary. I always wondered this actually. So having had children, they sort of get out the Doppler to listen for a heartbeat when the embryo is teeny, teeny tiny. And I always wondered how it could be that it had a fully formed heart. But what you're saying, I guess, is that you don't need a fully formed heart for a heart to beat. They can just do it as a cluster of cells. When it first starts, what we would identify as beating and a primitive heart, it's basically a tube squeezing. And that tube through a really amazing origami process of folding eventually develops into the mature heart. There's something very beautiful there. The idea that you have this tube that folds in on itself to be the thing that beats throughout your entire life. Something very romantic about it, I like that. Well, I mean, this is why I went into cardiology. I can see. I can see why. I can see why. So we exercise and our muscles use this molecule ATP to contract millions of muscle fibers. And tiny tears or stretches in those muscles are what causes us aches and pains after exercise as they are being repaired. That's how most of our muscles work, why they ache, but our hearts don't take and they never stop pumping until you are dead. So back to the original question, what is different about our hearts? Why don't they ache? After normal levels of exertion, you shouldn't be getting any pain in your heart. That kind of brings us to why that is and the differences in nerve supply. When you talk about pain sensation in your skin or your muscles, it's very important to be able to localize exactly where the pain's coming from. So you've got a great density of sensory nerves supplying those parts of the body. So you can pinpoint exactly where a problem is. Whereas with your internal organs, it's not really so important to know exactly where pain's coming from, just to kind of vaguely localize it. So the density of sensory nerves is much lower, but it's important for the organs to be able to tell your brain that something's wrong. Well, that makes sense because there are a lot less nerve endings in our hearts. It would be really distracting if we could literally feel our hearts beating all the time like a proper sensation. Yeah, because it's constantly working and it would be very distracting if you were just constantly the permanent sensation of your heart. Especially if you could have little scares. Oh, wait, oh no, there it is. There it is. Bad? No, it's good. That's not to feel it. No, okay, but Rohingt said something very interesting there, which tallies with the advice that you get about, you know, consult a medical professional before starting this exercise, which I'm sure all of us definitely, definitely do. He said that after normal levels of exertion, we shouldn't be getting any pain in our hearts. So what happens when you do? Well, I asked him about that. How often do patients turn up at his hospital with chest after exercising? Probably not that often. It does happen from time to time, but majority of my patients coming in with heart attacks are middle aged or elderly. So a lot of the time they're just that rest when these things come on and it's this sort of culmination of a disease process that's been building up over many years. And perhaps that's because people who are exercising regularly are just less likely to be unlucky enough to end up seeing me in the hospital anyway because that exercises doing them some benefits and keeping heart disease at bay. And how often do you get people coming in terrified that they're having chest pains? And actually they're just a bit burpy. Well, these patients often don't make it as far as me anymore. They'll be seen in A&E, but you know, if I think back to when I did an A&E job, I think I'm right in saying that about 30% of emergency department presentations are cardiac in nature. So it's a huge proportion of what we see. We're now able to very sensitively detect anything abnormal going on with the heart. Means that a lot of patients don't have to sit around waiting for us to make a decision about whether actually their heart is implicated or not. But it can be challenging. You know, it can be really difficult. And I was once engaged in a competitive eating competition years ago. And I completely messed up my preparation in that I had a smoothie. And so I wasn't really very hungry. And a pizza came that was sort of, I don't know, a meter across. I was really trying to force myself to eat to say face. And I got an intense central tight pain in my chest. If I had been non-medical, I would have absolutely thought that to heart attack. And what probably happened in that case is I had something called a soft-a-geal spasm, which is where the muscles in the gullet, the esophagus, just tense up and go into spasm. So since then, you know, I absolutely will never be judgmental if somebody comes in saying that they're thinking they're having heart attack and it turns out to be a bit burpy. You know what, I think you should take your aid advice and everything in moderation. Yes, exactly. Maybe no more pie-easing competitions. Yeah, I've left them in the past now. I've a bit more mature these days. So in summary there, sensible cardiovascular exercises likely to be a good thing, eating competitions, we're putting them in the bad column. Less likely to be a good thing. Or the very least, don't have a smoothie before I don't mean just amateur. Yes. So as Rohin said just then, even though chest pain doesn't happen often immediately after exercise and we know that exercise like walking or jogging or or even, you know, gentle things like gardening is far more likely to do your heart good, especially in the long term. Yes, but also I think we should say, and this goes back a bit to Keith's question about why we don't really feel what's going on in our heart. If something does go wrong with your heart, turns out you shouldn't necessarily expect a feel pain in your chest anyway. Are you telling me that Marlon Brando clutching his heart in the godfather shortly before dying? Are you saying that's not medically accurate? I mean, I don't think that film was a documentary. But perhaps more surprisingly, that kind of depiction in itself might be harmful. Cardiovascular disease remains the number one cause of death worldwide. Some of that is people failing to recognise the symptoms. So you're quite right in that the textbook description of somebody clutching the centre of their chest and this heavy weight on the chest. A lot of people still do experience that and that's probably the majority. But there is a significant proportion and we're more aware in recent years that women, especially may present in more typical ways. It has got this range, it could be back pain or it could just be referred to another spot. So you may get pain in what feels like a very distinctive location on the surface of the body. But actually that's because the nerve fibers supplying, say, the tip of the shoulder or the tooth or something are sharing part of their route to the brain to think about in a simple way with the organ that's having the problem. So even though you might get a problem around the diaphragm, you may get pain in the tip of the shoulder and this is referred pain. And thankfully, you know, this is a concept that we are familiar with in medicine. So that should be something crossing the doctor's mind when they're doing their assessment. But it can be very misleading. Now this takes us onto the downside of the heart's amazingness. If we do feel pain, if something goes really wrong, it's not easy to fix at all. I spoke to Sanjay Sinhar, one of the people whose job it is to fix a broken heart. He's at the University of Cambridge. And in the Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, and he's also a consultant cardiologist at Adam Brooks. The heart's terrible at repairing itself. If the average person has heart damage, your heart attack, and they lose their heart muscle, that's usually what happens in a heart's tank. Part of the heart muscle dies. That's never going to come back. It repairs itself in as much as it forms a scar. But that muscle that you've lost won't come back, and so the heart then doesn't contract as well. That is fundamentally why it's so serious. What is it about the heart muscle tissue that doesn't allow it to repair itself in the same way that a hamstring does? Some species can repair themselves. So if you look at zebrafish, for example, or if you look at cell amanders, if you injure the hearts in those animals, those hearts will repair themselves. The heart muscle cells will divide, and make more heart muscle cells, and you get normal hearts after a while. Obviously in mammals, we don't as adults repair ourselves. Although there is a window just after we're born, where for a few days we still retain that ability to repair the heart, and we can see this in mice that are just born. If they have heart damage, their hearts will repair themselves. But after a week or so after birth, the mouse heart then doesn't repair itself, and Geel is just the way hours does with a scar. The question is then why doesn't the human heart repair itself? And you can imagine what might happen if your heart or my heart were to try to repair itself by the cells forming new heart cells, because their heart cells are specialized to contract, so they're full of contractile myofilaments proteins. And for a cell to divide into two cells, it has to break all that down, divide into two, and then reassemble all the contractile machinery. And if that happens, that cell can't contract. And because it has to be all the time, you can imagine what would happen if our cells did try and divide. That's fascinating. I see the fact that it's in continuous use, the fact that all of those muscle cells and the muscle fibers are continually acting and can't stop, because that would be fatal. That actually inhibits the heart's ability to repair itself, because it just can't stop. That's a hypothesis. And the heart does divide the very low extent. So if you look very closely, you can see perhaps 1% of the heart muscle cells dividing over a year. So that's very, very low, and it's not enough to regenerate the heart in the event of damage. This reminds me, though, because Sanjay mentioned a bunch of animals there. Do you remember all those headlines a few years ago about how people were going to take pig's hearts and transplant them into humans? What happened with that? Yeah, yeah. Xeno transplantation, it was called. I mean, they did try it, just never really took off. There has been some progress in the last couple of years, but it wasn't the solution I think that everyone was looking for. There's loads of problems with risk of rejection, there's immune problems. People who did have those transplantations from different organisms would have to be on immunosuppressants for the rest of their lives, and that leaves you vulnerable to all sorts of other diseases. And then there was the problem of, you know, you have to eliminate the risk of other microscopic potentially infectious agents hitching a ride with the donor organ, you know, animal viruses. Not good in humans. Yeah, I think we've experienced that. I think we have when they spill over from one animal to us, turns out bad. Okay, so that kind of living solution is not quite there yet, but what about non-living solutions? Because we already use bits of inanimate kit to repair hearts, don't we? Yeah, yeah, definitely. So there's lots of physical structures that are used to open airways, things like stents, you know, little metal tubes that can hold arteries open, but there may be another way, and it's somewhere between the technological and the living solution stem cells. The problem is that someone's had a big heart attack and isn't heart failure. They've lost, perhaps, a billion heart cells. The heart only has about three to four billion heart cells, and if you lose a billion of them, that's the problem. And so how can we restore that? So an exciting idea that's emerged is can we use stem cells to generate new muscle? And there are two types of stem cells. One is an adult stem cell. These are stem cells that you have, I have in my body, and some organs have stem cells. The heart doesn't have stem cells. So how do we regenerate heart? Well, some people are using bone marrow stem cells to try and improve heart function, but that doesn't form heart muscle. So what people like my group and other groups are using is a different kind of stem cell called a pluripotent stem cell. And these stem cells have the ability to form any tissue, any cell type in the body. So using those, we can get them to form blood vessels, we can get them to form heart muscle. So we generate heart muscle in a dish in the laboratory. Now we can inject these heart cells into a damaged heart. Typically, we'll use an animal model for that. And we can see that the heart cells we inject in survive the integrate with the damaged heart and they contribute to the function of that damaged heart and improve the function. They restore the muscles that's been lost. Okay, hold on stem cells. That is one biology word that I do know about. You biogen said, I'm been excited about this for as long as I can remember there. Been the next big thing for fixing hearts. All sorts of treatments for ages and ages and ages. I feel that they've been just around the corner for a very long time now. Yeah, that is a fair criticism. We have been banging on about stem cells for a few decades. You know, we get a bit hypey about certain new technologies when they emerge sometimes, but I think that now in the 21st century, we are over the hype curve and into the the the the the the plateau of productivity. Thank you very much where stem cells are turning out to be, you know, actually useful. You've got to remember that like, you know, biology has millions of years of evolution behind it to get to what it does and that we're trying to manipulate it. So we have to be very careful that we're getting all the benefits of things like stem cells without introducing some potential problems. So stem cells in theory could work amazing wonders, but you can't just shove them really nearly and hope that they'll work. Exactly. We've got to try and you know, elicit some control over these cells. They do what we want them to do. In this case, like, you know, turning into heart cells which beat and they don't reproduce. So we're at the stage where we're doing very careful trials in animals such as mice and it's just not easy. There are a number of challenges. First of all, you need these heart cells to actually survive when you put them in the heart. You know, only 10% of the heart cells that we inject into a heart will actually survive. Secondly, they actually have to function properly and they have to integrate electrically with the surrounding heart muscle. It has to contract in a coordinated way, so there has to be good electrical connectivity between the cells you've put in and the recipient heart. If you get new heart muscle, it has to have a good blood supply. Otherwise, it's not going to function. In the heart, you have to make sure how do we prevent an immune response from the transplanted cells? So that's another issue I think we're still dealing with. So Sanjay and his team are trying to overcome some of these issues by developing a piece of new heart that works even before it's put into a human. We're generating heart cells in a pet tradition. Actually, putting them onto a scaffold and what you get then is this little patch, like a little mini heart muscle, and it's absolutely amazing. The idea then is that we can stitch this patch onto a damaged piece of heart and that patch will then help the heart to contract. So I mean, I hate asking this question to any scientist or clinician, but I sort of feel obliged to for the listener's benefit. How close are you? What sort of timescale are we looking at to overcome all of these ridiculous complexities, which are molecular in their origins, and genetic, and mechanical, and all of the things? How close do you think we are to actually having effective treatments for introducing new cells into heart? What I'll say is that I think we will be doing trials in patients in the next five years, which will give us an idea as to how difficult this will be. Now, what does that mean for when these treatments will be available to patients in hospitals? That's the real question, isn't it? And that's still a little way away, but I think the clinical trials that are essential will start over the next five years. And then it will take a number of years after that before we iron out all the problems and actually make sure that these are standard treatments that are available to patients routinely. But you're pretty hopeful that this is a course of action which is going to result in treatment for patients. I'm absolutely convinced of it, and I think it's going to benefit not just people who have heart problems. I think it's going to help patients with all sorts of degenerative conditions, whether that's diabetes, Parkinson's, other conditions where there's loss of an organ that's just not healing or repairing itself. And as that bright future is hopefully just a few years away, in the meantime, if you aren't already looking after your heart with exercise like I listen to a keith, here are some preventative tips from cardiologist Rahean on finding the sweet spot for keeping your heart healthy without overdoing it. What we tend to advise at the moment, and this is just a guide is an activity that makes you a bit out of breath for at least half an hour to an hour three times a week. But that's the kind of range of exertion. And no smoothies before piloting competitions. I think just avoid the piloting competitions altogether. So Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to why our hearts generally don't hurt after exercise, can we say K-Sold? Well, Professor Fry, my heart goes bumper-to-bumper-to-bumper-to-bumper-to-bumper. And keep stirring that from almost the moment of your inception until the day you die. The cells in your heart are not the same as the ones in skeletal muscles. And your heart doesn't have nerves like other muscles do, so you can't always feel it. And so we don't suffer from constant heartache. Were you proud of your bumper-to-bumline? I think it's that. One of the many low points of my broad-costing career. We have actually just recorded another episode today, Curios. And Adam made me write Wada Bam Shawadi Wadi. It's a song called Wambam Shammalang. Fine. By the silvers. Same thing. But you laughed at it. At it. If you keep laughing, I'll keep doing it. Okay, that seems fair. Tell you one thing about this episode. You know, I mean, talking a lot about weight loss in this episode. You know when you lose weight. Have you ever thought about where it goes? Where does it go? No. What a weird philosophical question. I think I always thought that you... Where does it go? Yeah, I always thought that you excreated it out in some way. Yeah, no. You don't do that. You breathe out. Yes, you do. That's really weird. Isn't it? And that's the way I try and think about it. You just got to do more breaths and then you're getting thinner. Yeah. No, right in the first bit, second bit, less accurate. Mathematicians' version. That is true though, isn't it? You know, the bottom line of dieting and losing weight is energy in and out. It is more complicated than that. And physicists always go, it's just energy in and out. But it's not. They do do it like that. But it's not. But no, but you are right though. It comes out as carbon in the form of carbon. You guys don't do the equation. Which one? The glucose one. Well, basically, that everything ends up as glucose, sort of, basically. But there's all sorts of complexities in biology, which means that if you don't eat for long periods of time, you use energy from different stores in your body like muscles or there's different ways of generating glucose. There's this process called gluconeogenesis, which literally means generating glucose from scratch. And which... Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. I was quite interested. At first time, you launched into a lecture and I cared about what you had to say. I haven't mentioned Darwin yet. I don't think Darwin has got anything to say about this to be honest with stuff. Yeah, fair enough. But it isn't as simple as energy out. Because your body does different things at different times, depending on what activity you do. So you eating a regular balanced diet. Eating less and doing more exercise is better for you. And breathing more. And breathing as much as possible. I mean, that's just a really good rule for life. Breathe more. Breathe. I wish I had a book about that. And don't think I will. Should we take Curie the week? Now, this one comes in from Pierre Paolo Donata. Who writes? I found my old periodic table from my university years the other day. And being in Italian, it has the element Curium, spelt as Curio, which I found might be interesting to you and your audience. Here is a picture of it. And there it is, 96 Curio. It's very nice. It is nice. Remember at the very beginning of when we started about 100 million years ago, we had a whole question. I think there was a vote on it where the Curio should be spelt with a cue or not. I think I blanked that out of my memory like all of the other stories that we've told in this book. It was literally 17 series ago. I think before any of us had children. Anyway, listen, that isn't the end of Pierre's email. And in fact, that is a nice thing. I don't think that's actually worthy of a Curio bag. It should. It's good, but it's the next bit that really gets yes. Pierre, the Curio bag. He says, by the way, as an Italian, I can assure you that it's indeed impossible to have a cappuccino in the afternoon. So this is in reference to me saying, I think I said, I want to have a cappuccino in the afternoon. I think both of us do it and know that it's terribly bad. But also he says, when I travel to the UK, I had the weird looks for drinking my espresso, standing at the counter. I just like the idea of him standing in Starbucks doing that. That's a cost of coffee. What are you doing? Yeah. Go away. Could you, would you mind getting out the way? But that is literally what it means. It's espresso. It's meant to be drunk quickly. Put your bag up and get on with your Italian day. So Paolo Donato, bye from Southern Italy, he says, can't wait for the next season. You are Curio of the week. Certainly are joining us next week. And in the meantime, send in anything you like really to CuriosCases at buc.co.uk. Ciao!
