Welcome to the podcast of Curious Cases. This episode is called the Curious Case of the Psychic Tier. We don't need the soundtrack, we can just do it ourselves. The thing is, the actual truth is that we sing it almost every time we do any recording. Yeah, it's a bit like in Star Wars when the actors make the lightsaber noises when they're actually on set. Really? Yeah, they do. It's unfortunate this is any radio because I'd love for people to see the dance that you have, but go the long with your singing machine. Anyway, episode two of season two of the Curious Cases of Doctors, Fry and Rutherford is called the Curious Case of the Psychic Tier. Indeed. It is basically asking the question and answering it, we hope, why do we cry? And by psychic tier, we mean the emotional tier, which you shed from your eye, Adam and Rutherford, whenever you watch a zombie film. Yeah, as I confess during the program, it does happen to me quite a lot. Not every film. No, no, in fact, as we will discover, it certainly didn't happen to me during the film that you made me watch. I had to watch, I think the worst film I've seen may be this century. Look, I just think, you know, it's the emotional journey of one man and his dog. Anyway, we don't want to give away too much. No, we don't. Anyway, here you go. Here is the Curious Case of the Psychic Tier. Are you alright? I'm fine. Why? Your eyes are a bit red. Have you been crying? No, I just got something in my eye. Anyway, have a look at this. Today's question has been sent in by listener Edith Cowman. Okay. Dear doctors, Rutherford and Fry, what is it about extreme pain, emotional shock or even more bizarrely the sight of a three-year-old stumbling their way through an off-key rendition of a way in a manger that makes the brain send messages to the lacrimal glands to chuck out water? That's tear ducts to you, doctor mathematician. Thanks, Edith. Can I continue with the question? Go on. What purpose can this possibly serve? You done now? Yes. Are you a cryer, Edith? Not in real life, but in films, I cry all the time. I even really unsentimental films I cried in stars, I cried in Batman vs Superman. Seriously? Yeah, I'm not kidding. When Wonder Woman appeared, it was brilliant. I'm the opposite. I struggled to suspend my disbelief enough to really get sucked in by schmaltz. It's not really schmaltz that sets it up. I'm going to give you an example. Where are we going? Well, best day of your life. I figured you should have a decent sleep. What is this? Okay, so maybe this is a little bit schmaltz, but this is tangled. The Disney Class A is the story of Rapunzel. She's been kept in a tower all of her life, but she's escaped using her amazing hair, and every year she would see a lantern raising up into the sky and wonder what it was. I've been looking out a window for 18 years dreaming about what it might feel like when those lights rise in the sky. She's seeing them for the first time for real, and it's incredibly moving. What if it's not everything I dreamed it would be? But it is everything that she dreamed it would be. Well, okay, okay, given that you like a good tear jacket, I have signed you up for a proper psychological study on crying. There's a special delivery arriving through your letterbox soon. So here are my instructions. I've been sent this package, and it is, oh my dear God. Hatchy, a dog's tail based on a true story. Golden Globe winner Richard Geer stars as Professor Parker Wilson, a distinguished scholar who discovers a lost Akita puppy on his way home from work. How is this even a film? This isn't a story? Oh no, please complete the following forms to record your emotional state before and after watching this film. The first one should be filled in just before the start to the second immediately after. The final two should be completed 20 minutes and 90 minutes after the end of the movie. I can't believe I have to watch that whole of this flipping movie. Okay, Hatchy goes in. So hang on, you will get all sentimental over tangled, a Disney animation aimed at five year-old girls, and yet snobby over hearted your dog's tail. They have to be high quality films and tangled is a high quality film. You don't know that Hatchy, a dog's tail isn't going to be a high quality film. Yes, I do. We'll come back later to see how it affected my mood and if I did cry. But before we come to that, I think we need to start from the basics here. You're the biologist. Tell us what happens when we cry. Right, so you see, it's a complex accretor motor phenomenon characterized by the shedding of saline from the lacrimal apparatus, often accompanied by sobbing, which is a convulsive inhaling and exhaling of air with spasms of the respiratory and trunkal muscle groups. Thanks, that explains everything. For a better picture, though, then even Adam Rutherford can provide, here is crying enthusiast Dr Nick Knight from West Middle Sex Hospital. So the production of a tear when it starts, it begins in the lacrimal gland, or known as the tear duct in the upper outer part of the eye. When you blink, you spread that across your eye. Ah, because I think most people would guess that the tear duct was actually on the inside corner of your eye. That's where the tear seems to collect anyway. It's very strange, but actually what happens is that tear has spread across your eye very thinly, and it's collected at the lacrimal punctum, which is that little fleshy bit that you can see sticking out the inner lower part of your eye. And that's like your drain for the tear. And the tear actually should go into that, like a sink plug hole, down the drain and out your nose, which is why you get a runny nose. Now, the reason that we get overflowing of tears is because that drain essentially gets blocked up. There's an overflow and the flooding begins. It's like you're overloading your nose drain. Absolutely. Your nose drain is completely overloaded, so rather than just have the tear go down and out your nose, it starts to cascade rather dramatically down your face. I should point out that nose drain is not a technical term. Now, when the sniveling turns into sobbing, our whole body gets involved, the heart rate increases and our blood vessels dilate. Giving us that attractive red blotchy hue of a proper good sob. So let's see if you're getting close to any of that Adam during Hartgier dog stale. Okay, we're an hour into this film. You know, unengaging, dramatic twist, Richard Gears just dropped dead, I think. I think he's had a massive heart attack and the dog's waiting from the station and yep, he's dead. Thank God for that. Fun night in then. No, it was appalling. It not one tear was shed. Ah, but did you know that there are not one, not two, but three different types of tear. Here's Dr Nick Knight again. The first is the worker tear, which is called the basal tear. And that's essentially to keep the eye nourished. Now, the other tear is called the reflex tear. So if you get an ear and a tint in your eye like an onion or if you're unfortunate to be in a riot and get pepper sprayed, that is the sort of tear that you're going to produce. So the purpose of that is actually to try and wash away any dirt or debris that's sitting on the eye. Now the final tear, the most important tear is the crying tear. And this is one that is triggered by a range of emotions. So you can cry because of pain, sadness, distress, happiness, joy, shock. This tear is the one that causes the most interest. And this is known as the psychic tear and it's been a mystery to science for hundreds of years. Scientists have long pondered over the complexities of crying. Why do we cry when we're happy as well as when we're sad? When we witness acts of great kindness and extreme cruelty? The great godfather of biology himself, Charles Darwin, decided to investigate the purpose of crying and wrote up his findings in his third best book, the expression of emotions in man and animals. As with so many of his experiments, he turned to his very favorite test subjects, his kids. Charles Darwin thought that the reason that babies cried was that if you screwed up your face for long enough, it would force tears to come out of your eyes. Psychologist and broadcaster Claudia Hammond, author of Emotional Roller Coaster. And so one day in his study, he had loads of children and one day in his study, he got them lined up in front of him and he asked them to screw up their faces for 45 minutes to see whether this would make them cry. And of course, finally enough, it did, probably because they didn't like standing there for 45 minutes. And so he concluded that emotional tears don't have any real purpose. Tears are just there to protect your eyes. Now psychologists today do think that crying has a purpose and there's still a bit of a debate about exactly what that purpose is. But many psychologists think it's all about communication and that if you cry, usually other people are nice to you. So if they were teasing you, they might realise they've gone a bit far and usually they'll comfort you. But what about tears of joy? How can we explain them? Joyful tears are a bit of a mystery. But again, it could be about communication, that you are communicating to other people, that this is one of the most amazing, joyful moments of your life. And it's your daughter's wedding or your own wedding. And these tears just spill forth. There's another possible purpose of crying and that's actually the second part of Edith Cowman's question. Yes, she also asks, a lot of people say they feel better after a good cry. Is this true and if so, why? Ah, and that is where our little experiment comes in involving you Adam in your pajamas on the sofa, watching a heartwarming tale of love between one man and his dog. Okay, I think this torture is finally over. Richard Gear died and I think he probably wrote that into the script himself just so he didn't have to film any more of this absolute touch. I'm afraid that he didn't come close to generating a tear in my eye and I do blood and movies quite easily. So now the credits are rolling and I have to fill out the emotional engagement form. All right, here we go again. So how do you feel right now at this moment on a scale of not at all to six to a great extent? Nervous, not at all. Bad tempered. I am pretty annoyed. So I'm going to give that a four. Weeping, no. Yes, angry. I mean, that's a four. Relaxed. I'm desperate to go to bed. It was rubbish. It was so rubbish. Why on earth did you make me do that? Well, this was the actual film used in a real crying study. And so we sent your forms to one of the authors, Professor Ad Fingalhoots from Tillberg University in the Netherlands. And here he is with your results. Your pattern of reactivity was very similar to what we observed among females. We did a study just with female subjects. I have made an index of your mood. So the higher the number that I say, the better your mood, your first measure was 80, then your decrease to minus four. And then there's again an increase to 11 and to 21. But the most of that emotion was anger rather than crying. It's... Yeah. But what were the results like for people who actually cried? Well, let me say such studies have been non-several time before. But then the measurements were limited to before the movie and immediately after the movie. But what was new in this study is that we also measured after 20 minutes and after 90 minutes. And then we saw there's not just a recovery to baseline, but significantly better. So it might indeed be the case that crying has a positive effect on mood, but it takes some time. What about the actual mechanism of why we feel better? What's going on physiologically that might make us feel better? Maybe crying stimulates the release in the brain of certain substances, such as oxytocin or endogenous opiwits, which have this mood-enhancing effect. If that would be the case, that would also imply that it might have effects on our pain perception. And that's what we are now working on in our current study. We're not just measuring mood, but we also subject to the study participants to a painful stimulus. And then we record how long they can endure that. So anyway, signed you up with that study too? Well, that's just great. I get to watch a terrible movie. And then I get physically tortured afterwards. All in the name of science, Adam, all in the name of science. So, Dr. Brotherford, can we say case solved? Well, the jury is still out about the purpose of crying, but we do know that psychic tears shed from our lacrimal glands are a uniquely human phenomenon, resulting from our autonomic nervous response to intense stress or emotion. And then a good cry probably does make you feel better in the end. That was the curious case of the psychic tear, in which we discovered that Adam Rutherford blobs at Disney films. It's true. Nothing wrong with that, though. I'm not ashamed of it. I think it's actually quite a positive thing to be honest about your crying. Yes. It doesn't feel very emotionally engaging now. I feel slightly embarrassed about it because it's like confessing that I can only cry whilst watching a really bloody film, whereas in talking to real people, I'm like, you're made of stuff. I'm like, you're made of stone. Whatever. What, I'm sorry. What did you say? I'm not listening. What? Things are quite interesting about the movie, which we didn't have time to cover in the radio show. But there are actually lots of studies looking at gender differences in men and women and how much they cry, which I know you have covered and Rutherford in an article. That's right. So, I've written a small feature to go alongside the programme, and it's available at BBC.com slash future, and if you search for curious cases in there, and the gender differences are real, all of the studies have shown that from about the age of seven onwards, women do cry more than men. Yes, on average, overlapping distributions, shall we say. That sounds like maths to me. It probably is. Also, on the BBC future website, you will find lots of other things about the series, including some excellent animated videos, which Adam Rutherford and I can claim almost no credit for whatsoever, but nonetheless, extremely proud of. Yes, they are. They are completely brilliant. So, don't forget, send us your questions for the next series. Every day science mysteries. Your conundrums, your irritations, and the web address is, and the email address is, and the email address is... BBC.co.uk. Oh, no, I'm sorry. If you do get... Curious cases at BBC.co.uk. And we will get on it.
