I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. We have come to the end of another series. Of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. Everyone is sad about it. I'm not. Oh, no, sorry. Are we recording this? Yes. Yes, we are. Everyone's sad about it. And we've particularly said about this one, because actually this is Michelle Martin, our amazing producers last ever episode of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. So, let's try really hard not to mess it up. Let's try really hard not to mess it up. Just, you know, this is... She wanted to give her all for this episode. She wanted to put everything in, you know, she really wanted to end a good one. And as you'll find out later, all Adam wanted to do was talk about investigating Jodie Foster's wormhole. LAUGHTER LAUGHTER You definitely can't do that. It just did. On with the show. MUSIC An exotic question today straight out of our Cosmic Casebook. Yes, we'll be travelling through space and time to answer the following questions. Sentin to curiouscases at bbc.co.uk by Manly Fidel Spence, age 12, who asks, what are wormholes and do they really exist? I'm super excited by this, because you know what's going to happen now. Mmm. OK, I love a wild guess. You're just going to get really excited to know about science fiction. Yes, and you are going to look at me like... That. All the way through this, but... But science fiction has played a really absolutely crucial role in this whole story. If you say so, Adam. OK, let's tackle our mini-curious first question. What exactly are wormholes? Well, I summoned my favourite cosmological force, Andrew Ponson, who gave me this, take home message. Imagine you've been living in your house for however many years. And you know that if you want to go from the kitchen to the bathroom, it's a bit of a long way. Imagine you live in a large house. You've got to go all the way from the east wing over to the central staircase. I agree. Up the central staircase. I agree. Over to the west wing into your bathroom. But then one day you discover that there's a mysterious door that can take you direct from your kitchen to your bathroom. That would be like a wormhole. It kind of linking two different parts of your house in a way that you didn't think was possible. But we're not talking at the scale of a house, are we? Right? It could be, but it could be at the scale of the entire university. But it could be tiny. It could be tiny. You know where I would like a wormhole between my house and work, because that would avoid me having to go on the trains. Well, it's certainly a novel solution to our commuting future. Yeah, imagine floating that as a new transport plan. We're going to link Manchester and Birmingham with a wormhole. Yes, still preferable to trains. It's true. So how did scientists dream up such a curious theory? Let's travel back through time for a bit of history. Wormholes began as a solution to a scientific headache. After revealing his general theory of relativity in 1915, Albert Einstein was consumed by a big hole in his argument, according to physicist and broadcaster Jim Alkalili. Einstein comes up with general relativity. It spawns a whole new field cosmology, the theory of the whole universe, but also says that when stars collapse, they form black holes. Now, back in 1930s, even black holes were not believed to be actually true. They were just artifacts of the maths. Even Einstein thought that. But one of the things that bothered him was that at the centre of a black hole, you reached the singularity, the point where all the stuff is squeezed to zero size, and therefore infinite density. And Einstein, like any good physicist, didn't like something of zero size, which contained stuff. It's like dividing by zero on your calculator, you know, it tells you. You've made an error. So with Nathan Rosen, they published this paper, which suggested that if you change the maths slightly, then that singularity becomes a bridge leading from the centre of the black hole to somewhere else, maybe another black hole or even a white hole. I think people are sort of familiar with the concept of a black hole, but white hole, that's a new one on me. Well, it's exactly what it says on the tin. A black hole is something that absorbs everything, all matter, even light that falls in doesn't come out, hence the name black. A white hole is the opposite. It doesn't suck anything in, but spits everything out. So early physicists suggested maybe everything that falls into a black hole, where does it go? It gets spat out at the other end, which is a white hole somewhere else. And that became known as the Einstein Rosen bridge. OK, but remember that episode where we talked about chucking me into a black hole? I do indeed have such fond memories. I'm just for you, maybe. But if I remember rightly, after you get sucks over the edge of a black hole, the vent horizon, you get stretched and spaghettified, then you get fried to a crisp, and then finally crushed an infinite density and zero size when you reach the singularity. Well, maybe you not want to try it at home, then? No, quite, but if either end of a wormhole is a black hole, this isn't going to be much used for a new fangle transportation system, Adam. Well, I can see how the risk assessment forms might pose something of a challenge. Luckily, that is not the end of the story for wormholes, because science fiction is coming to the rescue. In the film adaptation of Carl Sagan's classic book Contact, Jodie Foster, Ellie Arroway, while scouring the universe for signs of alien life stumbles across a mysterious signal from a far-off star. Position? I checked into parametry somewhere in the rear, I think. Vega, yeah, B. Only 26 light years away. Is this the one where they get some signal from space, and then it turns out to be instructions for how to build an alien machine, and then Jodie Foster uses it to go off and travel through the galaxy? You haven't seen it, have you? No, I looked that up on Wikipedia. Fine, anyway, when Carl Sagan was writing the novel, he had originally planned that she would plunge into a black hole created by the alien machine and emerge out of the black hole near the star of Vega. Yeah, I think we've concluded going into a black hole, that's not going to be safe for anyone. Exactly, so his bigetified Jodie Foster is a bad Jodie Foster. So, flummoxed by this physics, Sagan phoned a friend, and being Carl Sagan, his friend was world-leading relativity expert Kip Thorn. Now, Kip Thorn, played with Einstein's field equations and realised that it was theoretically possible to create a completely new type of traversable wormhole. And that's what Jodie Foster went through. It's a star. Hey, Mr. Kodthruel, where are we? And that, Dr. Fry, is how science fiction generated a modern wormhole theory. Later, it was published in a physics journal and spawned a brand new area of research, Nerdwin. All right, I'll give you that one this time. But if you think the idea of travelling through a wormhole is pretty weird, then hold on to your space helmets, because things are about to get a whole lot weirder. Because, according to Einstein's general theory of relativity, not only could wormholes be used to travel through space, but also through time. Here's Andrew Ponson on how you go about turning a wormhole into a time machine. If you're able to produce, say, two ends of a wormhole, that link two bits of space, if you take one of those ends, and you send it off on a journey at the speed of light, then you effectively send one end of your wormhole into the future. And now all of a sudden, you have a wormhole that's not only links across your house, but also links different epochs in history. The past and the future. It would just be the present and the future, because you can't send one of these things back in time. All you can do is take one end of your wormhole and send it into the future. But then you've got a very nice link that you can jump in one end of the wormhole, end up in the future, because you've sent it there, and then pop back. So you can come back to the present day, but you wouldn't be able to go back to before the wormhole was made. So as you can imagine, listen, as this bizarre idea raises infinite practical problems as Jim Elkele describes. When I talk to school kids about this, I say, well, imagine I had a wormhole with two ends. One is here today, and the other is over there yesterday. I jump in this end. I come out to the other end yesterday. I go and have a meal, have a rest. Come back today, join myself. We both jump in this end. We both come out the other end yesterday, and we join the two of us. So you end up multiplying Jim's to an infinite number of Jim's, which even I think is a bad thing. And suddenly, the whole thing just becomes absurd. Which will henceforth be known as the infinite Jim paradox. Which is a very scary prospect. But of course, science fiction loves a good paradox and using wormholes to travel through time has become an absolute staple. As I nerded out with science writer Jennifer Wollett. Oh dear. Contact might have been the first time you saw a wormhole being used in this way. But now the concept of interstellar or interdimensional portals has become so common that you see it almost everywhere. Rick and Morty uses it very well, and believe it or not, Bill and Ted's excellent adventure uses wormholes to great effect. So it's become kind of a staple of science fiction by now. Okay, so contact got the physics right when it comes to time travel. But a lot of science fiction hasn't, mainly because you can't actually change the past, right? So the notion of being able to change the past that you see in back to the future and loop, or that's just not how it works. There are laws of physics that actually protect you from being able to change the past. Most of the time when you see time travel and science fiction, that's ignored. And for good reason, because if there's a threat of changing your past and somehow wiping yourself out of existence that you see in back to the future and doctor who, that's drama. Those are stakes and those are things that science fiction writers love. But from a physics angle, the timeline is protected. You actually can't change something that has already happened because by definition it's already happened. So a better explanation is that you're actually generating a new timeline, which spawns another universe in the multiverse. Exactly, that's a nice little cheat. It gets you out of that mess. The multiverse or many worlds is actually a really good way of doing that. Hang on, what are you learning on about now? Well, so you can only change the past if you somehow produce another universe which is part of a multiverse containing all the different versions of the outcome your actions have created. Right. And that's allowed. That absolutely perfectly feasible according to physics. Okay, all right. Well, coming back to the final part of them of today's question, do wormholes really exist out there in space? Well, that's a question that I put to cosmologists Andrew Ponson. They exist mathematically on paper. But whether they actually exist is a bit of another question because to create one of these things and sustain it, you'd need a vast amount of a very exotic form of energy, very different from the energy that we know and love. It's of a form that we don't even really know whether it exists. But if it does, then you might be able to create a wormhole. Yeah, physicists, they do love a weird energy. They certainly do. And Andrew told me that this particular exotic energy is needed to hold the ends of the wormhole open and keep it stable. Okay, so I quiz Jim Alkalili about this. What exactly is so exotic about it? We hear about things like dark matter or anti-matter. They are boring in comparison with exotic matter, which is meant to have negative mass. I mean, what does it mean to say something has a matter of minus 5 kilograms? You're sure either the lowest mass you could have is nothing. Yes. So negative mass seems weird. But of course, another of Einstein's lessons is that mass and energy are related, e equals mc squared. So mass can convert to energy and vice versa. And we do have such a thing as negative energy. You can actually, in a sense, absorb energy from empty space from the vacuum. So the vacuum is then left with below zero energy, which is fine, as long as you give that energy back to the vacuum very quickly. Subject to highs and burgs on certain super-incipal. You know, it's like boring an overdraft for a bag. You can borrow money, but you've got to pay it back again. And the more money you borrow in this case, it will be equivalent to having to pay it back more quickly. So we can imagine, down at the quantum scale, borrowing energy from the vacuum, leaving the vacuum with negative energy. But that negative energy convert that into mass that holds a wormhole open. Whoa, I mean, that's, yeah, the maths might work, but in reality, no one can really seriously contemplate how that might be possible. So there you go after all that, wormhole is probably down in this. All right, well, just to hold off on the negative energy there, please, because Jim also told me that if you look hard enough, wormholes may actually be everywhere. Now, this is a pretty new idea in physics, but it might provide a solution to another age-old little problem that good old Einstein had pondered. So Einstein published his paper about wormholes, Einstein, Rosen, Bruges in 1935. In the same year, he published another paper about his discomfort with quantum mechanics and how can two particles that are entangled be separated far apart and yet somehow remain in communication? Well, there's a suggestion that the reason is because they're joined by a quantum wormhole. It's such a neat idea, but that's all this is at the moment. It's a hand-wavy idea, albeit the hands being waived by very serious physicists, but it suggests that maybe down at the tiniest length scales, wormholes can exist. Okay, place your bets. If you're going to put a fiver on this, would you go with wormholes exist or not? Okay, right. Well, then I'll put a fiver on wormholes existing, whether we can then grab hold of them and inflate them up to a size that allows us to send our spaceships through, that's still in the realms of science fiction. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to whether wormholes exist, can we say, case solved? Bruges through space were first mooted by Einstein to connect two locations via black holes. Transversible wormholes were dreamt up by Kipthorn as a plot device for Carl Sagan's story, contact, but they require an exotic form of matter to hold them open. However, new theories say that tiny, quantum wormholes might well be everywhere. And this could explain freaky physics like quantum entanglement. Another curious case where science could turn out to be even stranger than fiction. Okay, so that was brain scrambling in the slightest bit whatsoever. Exotic matter, exotic energy. I just like the idea of people sitting around in office being like, don't know what they answered. I was going to call up Kipthorn. Hey Kip, Sup, buddy, it's Carl Sagan here. I've got a big gap in my plot. What can you do about that? Have you tried hairy black holes? Yeah, that's not going to work. Have you called up the European extremely large telescope people? They might have an idea. Just popping some exotic energy in there and we're done. Exotic energy sounds like it's doing the hula with a ring of flowers. It's nice that I feel like it's like science is winking at us, you know, being like a big bang. I'm like, it's like that bang. Right. No, no, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no, no. That's going in. That's going in. That's going in. That's going in. Let's just go back because we've got some extra stuff as we often do. And when I was talking to Jim, you know, it's always such fun talking to Jim about these things. But we started talking about quantum entanglement. And that's the point at which, well, it's quite a few points after which my brain has begun to melt. But he says it's so confidently and so eloquently that you just sort of go along with it going, cool. I feel like when Jim's talking, I'm like, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you. I've totally got it. I totally understand it. And then the second it's over, gone. Do you know, a few years ago, I was making a TV dog with someone who'd worked with Jim a lot. I hope Jim's listening to this. I think I've said it to his face. If not, hi, Jim. And this producer says, well, we call this the, we call this the Jim Eccleidia effect where we do the program, we write it, we talk about something really, really complex and esoteric. But he explains it so eloquently and so well and there's some nice visuals that two days later, you go into work, you're standing at the water cool or whatever and you go, hey, subatomic particles, quarks, up, down, spin, you know, blah, blah, you go, totally get it. I saw this amazing documentary with Jim Eccleidia the other day, and we'll be see for them and they go, okay, gone and explained it to me. And you go, melt. There's quite small tangled things that they jodie foster and you gotta think of them. Yeah, just watch it. So on my player, it's really good. Anyway, one of the things I asked him was, if they do exist wormholes, would we even be able to spot them? In principle, I guess, yes, I mean, difficult to know how we would have evidence for them. Obviously, the obvious one is find one, jump in and see where you come out of the other end. Failing that, we'd have to see some evidence out in astronomy through our telescopes of something that can't be explained through, you know, the normal laws of astronomy. So maybe, you know, a white hole, something spurting out, matter and energy and radiation that can't be accounted for by, you know, say, a star or a supernova, it may be that it's coming through a wormhole. But again, you know, the simplest explanation will be something far less exotic than a wormhole. So it's hard to think what will be the killer experimental evidence that we say, yep, we've just proved wormholes exist. Just looking at each other, their arms up, okay? Yeah, it's more... It's more... It's more physicist sitting around going, well, hold on a minute. At some point, someone is going to say, we kind of need an experiment to demonstrate that this stuff exists, at which point we go, I'm a philanthropist. I had a conversation with Jim McLeod last week and I think it was all fixed and now I've got no idea. I remember that. It sounded very convincing to me, but I didn't, I didn't realise you actually want to prove it existed. I think Jim McLeod should moonlight as a lawyer, going to court cases and explain why people are innocent. And then the judge will be like, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, definitely. And then, try to have his report. You know, I've got no... I've got some sentencing over there. But nothing you said made any sense just then, it did at the time. So you're going to have to go to prison for a long time now, because Jim said so. The judge, judge Jim. We just believed him. Just believed him. Just believed him. Telling your another person is exactly like that. Blimm and Andrew Pompson, which is you with his simple words. And then you do all fulls apart immediately after that. Because I actually asked him the same question, his take. Looking for a wormhole is really hard, because in principle, it really is just something that links two bits of space and doesn't really come with a big flashing sign that says, here is a wormhole. You know, it could be actually almost impossible to see. The thing that we do know exists is black holes. What we know about black holes is that they can be very hard to find. And in fact, just recently, some of the first kind of images of the immediate surroundings of a black hole were taken by a global collaboration called the Event Horizon Telescope. It's an incredibly challenging thing to do. And it was only possible because they knew exactly where to look. Wormholes, we really don't have the first clue. They could probably only be generated by some kind of advanced civilization. And, you know, who knows. I think it's just not really going to be possible to search for them. Basically, you're saying aliens skip out the train on their way to work. Is that... It's a nice thought. It would be very nice to imagine that as possible. Or just humans, you know, if we become sufficiently advanced. On paper, this might be doable. In fact, there was a team led by Kip Thorn, who showed basically what you would need to do. In the future of our end civilization, maybe we'll be able to make and manipulate these things. Kip Thorn is flipping amazing by every possible measure. He and two others got the Nobel Prize a couple of years ago for discovery of gravitational waves. He was also heavily responsible for all the science in the film Interstellar. Oh! Which I didn't like. Why not? Because it didn't have a good story. There was a bit about the daughter. I'd... that was the bit I didn't like. Why? Because it was silly. Why? Because Matty McConaughey had to travel through a wormhole and do all the very clever science, which was all science-y, and the effects were amazing, and the music was amazing and everything. But none of it made any flipping sense. And... I can't remember, remind me what the motivation was. Yeah, all the earth has gone dry and dead and stuff. And Okra is the only vegetable available to humanity. Okay. So they decide that they've got something. I don't know. So they decide they've got to travel through... Skip a bit here. Someone can fill in the details by looking it up on IMDB. So there's a wormhole just outside Saturn, which they go through. They come out the other side, and there's some time dilation effects. So when Matty McConaughey comes back, his daughter has turned from being a little girl into being Jessica Chastain. But then he goes into a magic bookcase, and then he pushes a book out, and the clock thing happens, and then she's an old woman and everyone's happy again. And now none of us need to see the film. I think that's three hours of your life saved. That was a pretty accurate description. I thought everyone was quite happy with the film interstellar. I thought all the nerds were really happy about it. I didn't like it at all. The science has to serve the story. It's too early to get into the story. And in this it didn't. It was ostentatiously science-y, but the story was problematic. And it was an attempt to distract you with the amazing special effects, and the amazing science, and some quite good acting, and the amazing music. And Jessica Chastain. And Jessica Chastain was very distracting. From actually the fact that the story didn't make any sense to whatsoever. Okay. What about the JD Foster one, though? Contact. Yeah. Top five film of all time. I think we've spoken about. I think you've gone through the entire plot of contact on this programme before. So let's be fun, shall we? I think it's... No wait, wait! Let me... I love contact so much. Um, let's, uh, should we take care of the week? Yeah, let's take care of all the week! Rather than a prize, care of the week. I got some post. Yes, you did. This is very exciting. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Um, okay. Curious, top tip. If you send us physical things rather than electronic things, you jump up the list. But if you send us gifts, then you jump very high up the list. And if those gifts are scientific and related to something that we've covered in a previous show, you are a shoe-in. I'm sure there are some BBC regulations that prevent this kind of straight-up bribery. I'm a pre-anxer. Okay, so... I got this letter in from the very wonderful Clifford T. Brown PhD. He is from Florida at Lantic University. He is an archaeologist. And here is what he had to say. I appreciated your discussion of Obsidian during the Atomic Blade episode. As a reward, I enclose some flakes of Obsidian. Icho Obsidian. Brackets for you, Dr. Arthur and Miss Martin. But I think he sent them to me. So I think... Let me see that letter. I think it definitely says Bormie. Okay, okay, you ready? I put them in a box because they are extremely sharp. Okay, so here we go. Let's start. Let's start with this one here. So this here, the reddish... That's a secret. Look at that. ...is from Wyoming. Look at that. Oh, look at that. Isn't that glossy? Now, you'll remember, this is the sharpest natural object on Earth, right? So it looks... It's almost like pottery, but it's got a slightly ready, and it's got a sort of tiger stripe on there. Yeah, it's sunny edge. And the grey one, the shiny grey one... Don't just cut yourself because I haven't done a risk assessment. Oh, okay, okay, okay. Michelle's leaving. She hasn't done a risk assessment. Any accident that happens with this very sharp Obsidian is on her. And the grey one is from somewhere in California. And this one is sort of dark grey. Yeah, so this is the stuff that is from a volcano, but it cools so quickly, too quickly for crystals to form. So as a result, when you break it, the edge can be so sharp that it's as thin as a single molecule. And if you remember from our previous show, the Aztecs used to take this stuff and, you know, attach it to their clubs and essentially make these clubs that were sharp enough to lop a head off a horse, right? Yeah, we're not going to cut a head off a horse because that would be bad, but I'm just going to test it on the script now that we have recorded the script. Oh, look at that. Did you do it? It's not a matter of words. That is really sharp, actually. Oh, wow, crying. And this amount of blood is that normal? Michelle, it's fine. Okay, but his thing is, like Clifford, is an extremely generous man, because not only did he send me some Obsidian, me some Obsidian, I might show it, was it? He also said, in the cosmic egg episode, you sounded a little surprised by the idea of petrified wood. brackets, though, I don't discount the possibility that you were reading a script and acting. No Clifford, I was not acting. I really am just that much of an easier. We are terror actors. As a result, he's also enclosed. A chunk of petrified wood for us. You can see all of these. I put them up on my Twitter. So if you go to Frey-R squared on Twitter, you can see a photo of all of these little things. I've got a big chunk of petrified wood at home because I am in the herd, but that is lovely. It's kind of woody coloured, but the beautiful thing about it is, it's been napped so you can see the grain. So it's got these lovely, lovely, woody stripes in it. It really is wood turned into stone. Yes. Nice hair. Yeah, petrified. I'm just going to lick it. Are you? I'm a taste like petrified wood. Not some archaeologists actually used to, especially when discovering bones, would lick them to see if they were bones. What's the difference? What's the taste like? It's not the taste, it's just the texture. Poros. Well, if you're an experienced archaeologist, you can tell a difference between a stone and a bone, even if it's just a fragment. I mean, it's pretty well established as a technique. It's not recommended. Okay. Yeah. Right. Good. Okay. Big roast out. Oh. This is real sightseeing. The forensic scientists still do this. No, they don't. The forensic scientists definitely don't know. You just sit in your lab, drawing equations on boards, real scientists around, dusty river beds with tiny, tiny trials, and they spend months sifting through Earth. And after three months of really hard work, they find a piece of pottery from the 1980s. Thank you, though. So here was his final comment. He said, by the way, some of these artists may look like archaeological artifacts, but they are not, they're all modern, so don't worry about breaking them. If you do discard them, though, please do so responsibly. You don't want to create a bizarre and perplexing archaeological site by tossing these into the woods. That would really confuse future archaeologists. I'm doing that greatly. Well, there you go, Clifford. That's it. You're curi-o-the-wee. You definitely do, but hold on. We've got more potential curi-os of the week, although I can't quite work out who they are, because I just cut the script in half with Clifford's obsidian blade. Could you just give me a second to glue that back together again? It's all right. Don't worry about your script. I've got it. So this is from Christina R. Brackets. I'm writing an R, because there's no point in making you struggle with... Er... ...Rangelovic? Rangelovic? Rangelovic. This is Rangelovic. OK, go ahead. OK, dear, this is Dr. Dizzuz and... I am a 24-year-old, long-time listener, binge-listening to all your episodes in 2018 and eagerly awaiting a new one ever since from Norway. I came across Goldfinger's Moon Laser. At the end of the episode, you talk about the possibility that two curi-os with curi-o-pages could meet and fall in love. Well, my fiancee and I are both curi-os, but we are missing curi-o-pages. Smiley unfaced. What do you call that? Unhappy face. Unhappy face. And since we have no particular talents, I have no other choice but to plead. Could you please send us two curi-o-pages so that our wedding photo is complete? Well... I mean, I haven't really done enough of it. I mean, compared to Clifford sending us these amazing artifacts, I know, well, like Christine, let's up the stakes here a little bit. You can have curi-o-pages, but we want a photo of you on your wedding day. We want you to send us that photo. And we also want to mention in... One of the speeches. One of the speeches? Yes. Just one, just a quick mention. It doesn't have to be the focus of this best-made speech. You don't have to spend 10 or 15 minutes talking about how great this programme is. Just a casual mention in one of the speeches and you will get a gold badge. Oh, hang on, hang on. So we're sending them purple and they can upgrade to gold if they put us in their speech. I feel like we need to establish some proper rules here because every week we just make it up. You know what, next series we're going to have to buy some more gold badges. If we do, or we need to have the stakes, think we need a new... We need a sapphire badge. Yeah, platinum curi-o badge. Well, listen, Christina, or an unnamed fiance. That's your challenge. If we make it into your speech, you can definitely have a platinum one and we'll get Michelle to send it to you. And speaking of Michelle, we have one last curi-o of the week. We do. So it is a monumentous... Monumentous? Is that a word? We'll go with that. It's a monumentous date for us today because after 15 series, the creator of this programme has finally had enough. She's endured our nonsense for several years now. She's storming off. In a bit of a huff. We need to invite her into this studio. So Bob, could you pop this microphone on so that we can have Michelle in as our final guest on the series 15? Please. Hello, Michelle. Hi, Michelle. What are you planning? You naughty people. Well, we're actually going to be nice to you. Okay. Going to be nice to you. I'm not in a huff. No, I'm not in a huff. You just had a laugh. I love you a lot. Well, what we wanted to do, Michelle, is we wanted to get you a couple of little gifts to remind you of all of the brilliant times that you've had on Curest cases. Okay. So if you just want to open that one, open them up and describe what they are. Because I don't know whether you know how to make a radio program. I don't know. You might have to help me. Okay. And describe to listeners what they are and you have to establish why they are, why what these gifts are for. Some guessing. Okay. Okay. Pretty obvious. Very easy. Okay. Right. And bear in mind listeners that Michelle edits these programs. So it's quite possible. I'll just go on and you should just cut this all out. Okay. Depends what they are. Oh. Ha ha ha. Okay. So this, I remember these kind of devices from orienting in brownies and girl guides. So it's how can you find your way somewhere? You're not right. You're finding your way. Really bad with direction. It's a compass. Curios. Because Michelle, still, after how many years have you been working at the BBC? 20. 20 years at the BBC. Five on Curest cases. She still comes out of the lift and turns in the wrong direction. Do you know what I wanted to tell you? Yesterday on my way home from work to the train station, I got lost. You, uh, you can hear more about what's in Michelle's complete inability to function as an adult human when out on the streets on her own in one of the earlier series. I lost producer. Lost producer. Yes. Go through a back catalog. Let's find that gem where they were very mean to me. And I got lost. I don't think I'm in a name. I think we just pointed out your obvious flaws. Oh, I know this one too. Okay, so this, the listeners, is a stopwatch. And I wonder why I've got a stopwatch. Could it be because I'm really slow, um, at which was proven when Hannah and Adam made me try and run really fast because they both pretended to be ill and could make the recording. I have sore foot. I think you're saying this in a left positive way than I would say, miss. I think Michelle, now that you've left the BBC, this is a really great opportunity for you to improve on your, on your running. So there's your stopwatch there. Okay. I've also got your whistle. That you can give to a loved one. Right. You can help motivate you like a dog whistle. This was the episode in which the question was how fast could a human possibly run? We had the Japanese professor who ran like a monkey faster than Michelle can run like a human. That's correct. And I had a slightly dirty foot. We were in Bath, yes. And you both came up with some nonsense excuses. Mm-hmm. Yep. Yep. Okay. And we also got your card to remember us by... Gosh. Here's the card. I did one side of the card. Adam did the other. Yes, let's not mention what's on the other side of the card listeners because she really don't want to know. You're so naughty. How do I drew that? Yes. Um... Do I read? Do I read? Yeah. Okay. Dimashow, great news. You're still alive. You made it out the other side with only a few battleskars and mind of psychological damage to show for it. Ah. That's all right. The therapy's been really worth it. But to show me how much we mean to us, we've decided to award you with the following trophy. Oh, so many presents. Oh my gosh. Never had so many presents. Is it an actual trophy? Is it an actual... Oh my goodness. They're hilarious. Oh, it's the first. The only lifetime Q-E-O awards. Yay! Yay! This is even higher than platinum or gold or purple badges. This is one time only. This is the... We're retiring this award. Wow, we're tired. With the show, you are the lifetime Q-E-O of the lifetime universe. No. A proper trophy. We are now an award-winning programme. Thanks, guys. It took awarding ourselves. It's fine. It's fine. That's fine. Nobody needs to know that. Well, this is... It's a business, though. It's a business. Thank you so much for everything. Wow. I know that we may sound like we're mean to each other on the show, but actually, we all get unincrequently well. And we will miss you very much. Oh. We will. You created this show. In fact, and now you are relieved. Ah. We don't actually know what's going to happen next. We don't know where the stop button is. We don't know really how to do that. Any of this. We have no idea where the next series is. We don't... We're turns out that we don't... We don't know any of the... Michelle, gone. Bye. I'm off anyway. Bye. And we don't... We don't have a... We don't even know how to end this programme. We will be back, hopefully, at some point in the future. But please do send in your questions to curious cases at BBC.co.uk. That is the one thing that will remain constant. We don't actually know how to access that email box either. That went straight to Michelle. I don't have that either. So if you could fax us your questions or shine them in the night sky like the bat signal. Or ask Clifford how to get my address. Yes, that would be good to... It will all be fine. Listen, I'm going to write a big list. I'm going to give you the keys to the email cupboard. This will be fine. It will be fine. It will be fine. We'll be back soon. Don't worry. We'll be back soon. See you next series. Thanks, everyone. Bye. Hi, everyone. Russell Cain here. I've got just a few seconds to tell you about Evil Genius. Our hit podcast to 1.5 million downloads in 2019. On the top 10 where we take people from history, Gandhi, Margaret Thatcher, John Lennon and detonate fact bombs around their reputations. It's stuff you don't want to know, but you really do want to know. At the end of a lively debate, my panel of esteemed guests read banging comedians all have to vote evil or genius. There's no gray area. This is cancel culture turned into an innovative format. Subscribe to Evil Genius on BBC Sounds now.
