I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. And that's all for today's Curious Cases. Join us next week. Hang on, we appear to have travelled into the future here, Adam. It needs to come back to the beginning of the programme. Hold on. This can only mean that we have succeeded in today's quest to travel faster than the speed of light. And to warn you this week, we are going to be grappling with Einstein's special theory of relativity and Jim Acklade's box of shorts. Enjoy! Are rather enlightening cases for us to investigate today? Yes, Ali Arshary, who lives in Ketif in Saudi Arabia, sent in this question to Curious Cases at BBC.co.uk. We often read that the fastest thing in the universe is the speed of light. Now, why do we have this limitation and can anything possibly be faster? Have you ever stopped to think about what life would be like if suddenly all of the lights went out? Yeah, well, we wouldn't last very long because plants wouldn't grow, so we'd starve. Oxygen wouldn't be replenished, so we would suffocate. And eventually, one of our energy supplies would dry up. And we'd be deffined by the incescent hooting of owls. Indeed we would. But let's start by going back because it's a Curious tale of how we came to illuminate the secrets of light. Greek mega mathematician Euclid in 300 BCE believed that our eyes fire infinitely fast particles that light up everything in their path, and that is how we see. Have you changed thanks in part to a Muslim scholar known as Al-Hazan, born in Basra in 965, Al-Hazan boasted that he could tame the river Nile by building a dam to stop it flooding? When the Egyptian caliph heard about his claim, he invited him to stay. But when Al-Hazan witnessed the enormity of the challenge, he got cold feet. The caliph was furious and threw Al-Hazan into jail. It was during these dark days that he made a dazzling discovery. Inside the blackness of his cell, a shard of light spilt through a tiny pinhole, projecting an image of the outside world onto the wall opposite. He designed experiments which proved that light travels in straight lines and creates pictures when it hits our eyes. Translates into Latin, this experiment became known as the Camera Obscura, meaning dark chamber. Well, that's all very interesting, but what about the speed? Are listener Arley asked whether anything can travel faster than light? Right, then I'm going to call in the big guns here. I collared physics supremo, presenter of the life scientific Jim Al-Khalili. There's a speed in our universe that is the maximum speed possible for anything. It happens to have a certain value, which is 300,000 kilometers per second. Nothing can go faster than that because that's a speed that's built into the fabric of space and time itself. It so happens that light is able to travel at this maximum speed. So it's not sort of light that's special, it's the speed itself that is special for our universe. There may be other universes in which that maximum speed is quite different. What puts the constraints on that speed? Why, according to our understanding of the universe, is there a maximum speed? It goes back to Einstein's special theory of relativity in 1905. I mean, that is the theory that gave us E equals mc squared. The speed of light comes in in the way it hooks up space with time. You know, we talk about there's three dimensions of space that's the world we live in, but there's also time. Isaac Newton said time is separate, time is space are independent things. Einstein said no time and space are intimately connected and it's the speed of light that connects them in ways that we then see if we try and make something travel as close to the speed of light as possible. Weird things happen. Weird things happen. Well, get ready for some weirdness. Weirdness is sort of a really non-specific scientific term. How weird are we talking about here? Well, okay, let's start with this particular train of thought with fellow passenger, cosmologist and well-nice chap Andrew Ponson. Welcome aboard, this is not used to service to London travel. So you imagine you're traveling on a train and you throw a ball down the carriage and you watch it traveling and to you it appears like it's going at the speed you'd normally throw a ball, which in my case is quite slow, but you might be better at it than I am. The train now goes back to one because it's not stuck here. Suppose then that actually somebody is standing outside the train on the platform as you whiz passed and they also see the ball, well they would see it traveling not at the speed that you threw it, but at the speed that the train's going plus the speed that you threw it, because obviously both motions are going on at the same time. That all sounds like fairly common sense, but the problems start when you speed up at the train. As you get nearer and nearer to the speed of light, the ball doesn't travel at the speed of the train plus the speed you threw it. It's as though something is stopping it from getting any faster. Even if you're going slightly below the speed of light, which is more realistic for a train, at least a British rail train, and you chuck that ball, it still won't be the case that you've got your original speed plus a little bit extra, it'll barely increase. It gets harder and harder to add speed on as you get up towards the speed of light. It's a very, very weird effect, and it's all tied up with the stretching of space and time. Right, so now we're stretching space and time. Yes, and this is where it all gets a bit weird, because as you get nearer and nearer to the speed of light, our train gets a bit, mm, squashy. Your train traveling near the speed of light will appear for me outside to squish up and become absolutely tiny in the direction that it's moving in, and it can seem like the mass is also increasing. It's another way to think of why you can't get beyond the speed of light, because if you try, it seems like your mass starts getting larger and larger and larger, that makes it harder and harder to actually push the train to go any faster. Is that the E equals mc squared equation? It's an extension of the E equals mc squared equation, actually, the full equation is something like e squared equals m squared c to the fourth plus p squared, c squared. Of course, of course. It's not as catchy, but the bit on the end describes how the effective mass is going to change, because there's actually motion involved as well. That was the sound of my head exploding. Well, it gets even stranger when you look at what happens to time. If you could travel at the speed of light, you would experience the entire history of the universe in an instant. Oh, right. Look at that. Was the sound of my brain falling out of my ear? Try and scoop it up, will you? Because if you could travel faster than the speed of light, all of the laws of cause and effect would break down and the notion of the past and the future completely falls apart. Plus, you would need infinite mass and infinite energy. So, in summary, universal speed is kind of a bedrock of physics. Hang on a second. If traveling at the speed of light means you need to have infinite mass and infinite energy, how does light manage it? Well, light doesn't have any mass at all. So it's free to travel at this cosmic speed limit. Okay, I think about how about this, though, because in 2011, an earth-shattering discovery was announced at the Threatened to overturn everything we know about the speed of light. Special relativity and the whole of modern physics. It started in Italy, home of opera, by which I mean the oscillation project with a motion tracking apparatus. And on OPER? Yes, the R as in T-racking. Of course. These world-class physicists and amateur acronym enthusiasts were studying tiny subatomic particles called neutrinos in the Grand Sassos Observatory housed inside a mountain. But unlike light, neutrinos have a tiny amount of mass. So, according to Einstein's special theory of relativity, they should travel below the speed of light. Here's Jim Alculele again. So this was an experiment in which a beam of neutrinos was created at CERN in Geneva and fired towards a target under a mountain in Italy. But the thing about neutrinos is they interact very weekly with normal matter. So, you fire neutrinos through the earth, it can travel right through and come out the other side. And there are then big detectors there that try and capture these elusive particles. And what was the purpose of that particular experiment and in general firing neutrinos at Italy? Nothing against Italy. The headline said this beam of neutrinos was traveling faster than the speed of light. So, the scientists who had carried out the experiment in Italy, they published these results, they went to the press and everyone was very excited that, aha, few scientists, you've been saying nothing go faster than light. Here we found neutrinos traveling faster than the speed of light. This would revolutionise physics. It was a claim that contradicted more than 100 years of scientific orthodoxy. It has created a huge fury. If it's true, the implications are just amazing. Their mind glimpses. They really are. They really will turn things on their heads. This is earthshaking if it's true. You would actually be able to travel back in time. We just have to tear up all the textbooks and start what we're going to get. Well, that was how the BBC TV series Horizon, presented by Marcus DeSoto, I described the shock waves that caused through the physics community after that story broke. People do seem to be using the words if it's true quite a lot in that clip. Yeah, well, there was a lot of excitement, but there was also widespread skepticism too, and it wasn't just Einstein's theories that were perilously close to being exposed. It started by me tweeting to someone saying, there's no way. If neutrinos can go faster than light, I will eat my boxershorts live on TV. Did you say that? I said it on Twitter to someone forgetting that there are other people on Twitter, among whom was some researcher working for News Night, and BBC, but it ended up me being interviewed on News Night, and people started sending me recipes for cooking boxer shorts, what sources to add to them. But it wasn't long before your boxes remain. My boxes were made in tact. Remain safe because what turned out to be the problem was that there was a loose connection in the back of one of the computers in the laboratory in Italy, which when someone spotted it and clicked it into place, suddenly all the results became sensible. Neutrinos were traveling just below the speed of light. A relief for everyone concerned. Yes, well apart from the poor opera experimenters, what's the whole of physics really on the brink of being rewritten due to a loose cable? Well, yeah, sort of. Apparently it was a fibre optic cable that powered the digital clock, so all of the timings have been thrown off. Well, I suppose that's a slightly simpler explanation than everything we know being wrong. Yeah, as the man says, extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence, and maybe one day that evidence will come. I should say, I wanted it to be true. I really wanted it to be true. You want new physics. You want to overthrow what's come before. But for this experiment to be right, we'd have meant that thousands of other experiments showing that nothing can go faster than light had to be wrong. It would have meant that Einstein was wrong. It would have meant that we had to overthrow so much of our understanding of fundamental physics. I mean, in many ways, although we sort of laugh about it, and there was, of course, the box of shorts incident, which never happened. We're all grateful for that. But in many ways, this is a perfect demonstration of science working as it should do. Yeah, science is about making mistakes, and it's about learning from those mistakes. And also, you know, I wasn't being arrogant in saying there's no way you're going to change the status quo. It's just that you would need some really, really firm evidence to overthrow a century of physics. We've even tried to knock Einstein's theorem, we haven't, but that doesn't mean we should ever, ever stop trying. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to whether anything can travel faster than the speed of light, can we say case solved? Yes, as far as we know, nothing can. This cosmic speed limit forms the basis of Einstein's special theory of relativity. Because if you approached the speed of light, you would have infinite mass and infinite energy. And if an experiment says otherwise, you might just want to check that everything is plugged in first. Okay, so there you go. Check that your instruments are plugged in correctly. We always use this as an example of science really working quite well, actually. They weren't saying that they'd found something traveling faster than the speed of light. They were saying this is what the results say. Can someone else sort this out for us? I bet though, when they went to bed at night time, there's a little bit of them that like allowed their mind to wonder into a little fantasy of them ruining Einstein's theories. Yes, all physics would have had to have been rewritten if they'd been right. But it's like that, you know, lifting the world cup, isn't it? Just like just at that moment of like the glory. Do you dream about doing that? Lifting the world cup? Do you ever dream about Jim Alculele's box of shots? Almost nonstop. Sometimes it's difficult to get away from it. Still, nice to have a bit of cosmology in the show for a change. I'm just moving on very quickly from that. Hannah is laughing a lot on the topic of cosmology. We have a little, well, little special treat really because a couple of weeks ago, we mean Hannah, we're doing a, we were doing a live gig at the Hammersmith Apollo with it with, I don't some guys. Yeah, we were just on stage. We did that program on radio for that. One of them is Brian. No, Brian. Brian. No, we were doing this gig with Brian Cox and Robin in of Monkey Cage fame. You might have heard of them. You might have heard of them. They do quite a good podcast actually. It should be bought to be perfect honest. You'll hear them at the end of this one. Probably. Well, anyway, so we're doing this gig and then backstage when we were sort of just hanging around with the various sort of rag tag group of comedians, scientists, musicians, clang. And it turns out one of those astronauts had a very familiar voice. Many of our podcasts listeners, the curious will know that a couple of seasons ago, we did a program about the glitch in space. There's South Atlantic in our way. Exactly, and during that program, there was a rather extraordinary interview with a rather extraordinary astronaut. Did you do that interview? I did. Oh, it was so exciting. No, I didn't. I don't remember where I was on the day that that interview was done. No, I didn't get to do it. No, I didn't get to do it. Who did that interview? Hello, my name is Terry Vers. Oh my god. That is the me. What do you do? I am a mathematician. Oh, no. I co-present all of the curious cases of brother and brother and brother. But I did an interview with them. I don't remember you. You know, it wasn't me. It was super weird. Because the program is called... I'm Terry, by the way. I'm a brother. I'm a brother. Yeah, nice to meet you. And so the program is called Brother, Foot and Fright. And yet, weirdly, we're in front of you right now and you've not spoken to either or wasn't just walked. I mean, London and I see you too. Yeah, that's so weird. And we were like, I did an interview with UI5. Weirdly. It's not true. It's not true. And his machin' Martin knew that she had an opportunity to interview a real-life national, as he took it from us. He didn't call us and email us and just took the job. And yet now, we have bumped into you. Okay, so Terry, before we get into, you know, the amazingness of having been in the national, right? How was it being interviewed by Michelle? It was amazing. One of the highlights of my career. Right. It was. I imagine that's a great one. That's had a few highlights, so it's been a very interesting career. Pretty cool. I got to be a fighter pilot and test pilot in astronaut. And now, radio interview-e. Just keeps getting higher. It keeps on getting better. So, tonight we're actually in the hamson of Apollo, in which all three of us have been on stage. And you were talking about your experiences in national and lots of photographs that you took from us. I was. Yeah, so I'm kind of a photography buff. And then, while I was in space, I ended up taking over 300,000 pictures. Some of them were for an iMac's movie called Beautiful Planet. It's playing here at the London Science Center and several iMac's theaters here in London. And it is awesome. It's an amazing movie. Just about what it's like to be in space. And then, when I left NASA last year, one of the first things I wanted to do was write a book. So, partnered with National Geographic and made this photography book combined with stories from what it's like to be in space. Called you from above. I wish I could come up with words, but they're just aren't enough words in the English language to talk about. What it's really like to see it with your own eyes. But, you know, through the movie Beautiful Planet, through this book, you from above, I tried to capture what it's like to be in space. Do you act differently? Yeah. Having been in space. So, one of my jobs now is to speak. And I end a lot of my talks with some photos of sunsets. I love taking sunrises and sunset pictures. And when I get stressed out here, I've got problems on earth. There's always something like the traffic trying to get to the tube, takes forever. Right? I just try and back up. I close my eyes. I try and think of the sunset. There's been a billion of those in the past. There's going to be a billion more in the future. So, in the scheme of the universe and the galaxy and stars, you know, the problems are not that we're insignificant. People are not insignificant. But it's made me hopefully more mellow and maybe taking the edge off and that is uptight about stuff. And that's why I wanted to write this book and do speaking is just to share that amazing experience with people who are super interested in it. But, you know, most people don't get to do it. Thank you, Terry. Thank you. Nice to meet you. To meet you fully. I think being on a program already, to actually me. Right. So, there you go. That was Sastronaught Terry Vertz. That's it. How about stuck into the studio during that clip? And said, I'll come out of this. What's that? There's a humming in the corner. Oh, look at that. That is Michelle. Hello, Curios. I thought I might take this opportunity to join Hannah and Adam in the studio. So nice to have you. To redress the balance. Welcome Michelle. On this. I would just... Which is true. Her like a hostile guy. I get really combative. It's like being on today. I would just like to state that the reason why I recorded that interview with the lovely Terry Vertz. He was lovely. He was lovely. When we finally met him, he was very lovely. It was many months after he was on our program. Was because you were both on holiday. But we? Yes. You were in Sweden doing something, a wedding or something. And you were in a cottage, cottageing or something. Hence I stepped into the beach selflessly to keep the show on the road. That's all I want to say. That isn't my recollection of events. No, that's not my recollection. Surprisingly. You know, isn't it a coincidence? I took one week holiday in the entire year last year. And isn't it a coincidence that that's the only time that Terry Vertz could do? He's a very busy man. I think what actually is a very busy man is that you looked in the diary. So a two day window with me and Adam were away. And deliberately chose that to be the moment to approach the action. If we look at the other guests who've been on the program over the years and we rank them in terms of the number of times they've been on the show. Molly's first. Molly is first after being down. Molly first. That's Hannah's dog. And then there's the, you know, Mark with dog Nick and Helen Chersky. And your punts are being on. A few days and you know, all fantastic people. But you didn't, you didn't feel the need to chip and interview those guys. No, it was only when an asked a person who's actually been to space came on that you thought, well, I better do this one. Cure's, I will let you decide who you believe. Oh, I'm so happy about that. That's the, that's all I want to say. That's it. Right. Well, that brings us very neatly. Well, to the beginning of a campaign on Twitter and which we get support our side of the arguments. And then we don't want it. This is a turf where we do not want to have. Not with Michelle. Remember who does the editing. Yes, it's true. I'm sorry. Sorry. Sorry. It was really good into you as well. It was really good. That was great. Anyway, Cure's. It is time for Cure's after week. As Angelica's you sounded singing that Adam. As beautiful as that was. We have something even more beautiful for your ears because someone has sent us in another jingle that is 100% pure awesomeness. It is. This is from Jeff Perkins from Indianapolis in the United States. Here we go. Fast and curious occasionless, curious, totally geeky. Rather than a prize, Cureo of the week. Unbelievable, pretty good. But I think this deserves further analysis. There was a little sort of bowie wobble in the voice there. There's also like a little sign-failed S. Cubounce in the beat. Yeah, in the baseline. What, what, what, please put that. Jeff, you're, you're our hero. It's, it's, it's a thing of great beauty. And you are, in fact, this week's Cureo of the week. Cureo of the week. That's not the end there. You can send us in your Cureo jingles and your emails and your questions, in fact. I mean, they're sort of more fundamental to the show. To Cureo's cases at BBC.co.uk. Hello and welcome to today's curious cases. Oh, that's where the start of the programme went. Next week, the Cureo's faceoff will see you then. This is the BBC. If you like listening to the Cureo's cases of Rutherford and Fry, then you will like, you, right? I've got to say will. Yeah, I thought it was a probabilistic universe. No, I mean, this case is certain that if you like that, then really you are going to like this much more. And this is, well, the infinite monkey cage. All right, so wherever you are on the universe that you're listening to right now, just have a little search for it and then hit subscribe.
