I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. I do like it. I like it a lot, even with that squeaky voice. This is the last episode in series nine of the curious cases of me and her. And we thought that we would go out with a bang. A big bang, if you will. Hey. Yeah. Is it me? Yes. A big astrophysics, big bang. Unlike the double episode at the beginning of this series, which is also that big bangs in a very different context. So we got tons of pod extras after the show for the devoted curious. But if you've just stumbled across this podcast after seeing a strange photo of two people wearing fake moustaches flash up on your screen. And then I hope that you enjoy the episode that we have created for you. A grand cosmic puzzle for today sent into curiouscases at BBC.co.uk by Simon Whiteheads. How do we measure the age of the universe? Right. So that sounds like a really easy question. Well, you think so when you, but to answer it, we are going to need to go on an epic voyage that will take us to the furthest reaches of space and to the very beginning of time. All right. Calm down, Obi-Wan. Actually, even if we go back just a hundred years, this wouldn't be considered a question because we didn't think that the universe had an age at all. In the beginning, well, there was no beginning. At the beginning of the 20th century, I guess the consensus was that the universe was eternal. It was ageless. There was not a perception that there was actually a beginning to time. It was only later that we realised that in fact, it had a beginning at all. This episode is the story of how we discovered that the universe did have a beginning and therefore an age. And to find out how it all started, I consulted a man for all ages, physicist and broadcaster Jim Alculele. When Einstein kicked all this off in 1915 with a general theory of relativity, he was so sure that the universe had been around forever, that when he realised his equations of general relativity could describe the entire universe, he had to fiddle the maths just to make sure that the universe was stable and eternal. When you say fiddle the maths, he literally fiddle the maths. He had an equation and the equation suggested that the universe was unstable because it has gravity. All the stuff in the universe is pulling it together. So for him to stabilise the universe to make sure that it's not collapsing on itself, he put in this extra term in the equation, called the cosmological constant, which adds essentially a force of anti-gravity and it holds the universe inflated so it doesn't move. So he cheated. There you go, kids. Don't cheat at maths. The universe will find you out. Okay, so Einstein thought the universe didn't have a beginning, but we do now. So who proved him wrong? Right, it was an unlikely character called Georges Lermetre. Good accent. Why was he unlikely? Well, he was Belgian, he was a physicist and he was also a Catholic priest and he was the first person to match theory and observation and realised that the universe was expanding. Rewind time and the universe would have been small and super dense what he later called the cosmic egg. Lermetre meets with Einstein, I think it was 1927 in Brussels and he presents him with the idea that the universe is expanding from a point in time and Einstein really lays into him. He says your mathematics is beautiful but your physics is abominable. Abominable. So yeah, I mean, we meet up with someone who's just correcting your theories and actually turns out to be right in the long term and you call him abominable. And a priest as well. Yeah. That was outrageous that I'm saying. All right. So what happens next? Well, Lermetre publishes his work in a really obscure Belgian journal that everyone just promptly forgets about and ignores entirely abominable. Poor old Lermetre. Yeah, I know. I suppose being right is his ultimate legacy. Quite. Now, next in the story comes the famous American astronomer Edwin Hubble. He had just shocked the world by discovering that there were galaxies outside of our own Milky Way. Our go-to cosmologist Andrew Ponson told me how Hubble managed to prove to everyone once and for all that the universe was expanding. He did this by looking to a number of distant galaxies and he was able to show that the further away you look, the faster those galaxies seem to be flying away from us. And that suggests a picture where the whole universe does seem to be expanding. How on earth do you know if a galaxy is moving away from you? You use the Doppler shift. You measure the colour of the galaxy's lights and that was a new technology back when Hubble was doing this work. So you measure that colour and if it looks redder than it should do, then you know it's moving and the extent to which it looks redder than it should do tells you exactly how fast it's moving away from you. Is this the same thing as when a car goes past you and the noise sort of goes, it's exactly that. Oh right, sorry, I was just waiting for a bit more explanation there. Okay, okay, here's how it works. Imagine you're standing on the pavement and I am in a car that is about to whiz past you. As I travel towards you, you will hear my voice speed up and then as I go past you, it will slow down. Okay, that was weird. But what's happening is that as I come towards you, the wavelength gets all squashed up and then as I travel away, it gets stretched out. But what has this got to do with galaxies? Well, like sound, light is also a wave. So, as space stretches, galaxies are moving away from us and the wavelength is also stretched. And effectively, the light gets shifted down the spectrum to look a little bit redder, hence astronomers call this redshift. Redshift, yeah, okay, so yet another name from the say what you see school of scientific nomenclature there. Right. And by measuring how much the light shifts, you can work out how fast your galaxy is moving. Okay, so how does this help us work out the age of the universe? I need to borrow the curious cases metaphorical car and call on astrophysicist Joe Dunkley from Princeton University. For car, it's driving away from you at 60 miles an hour and it's 60 miles away from you. Then just by knowing how far away it is from you and how fast it's going, you know that it's set off from you an hour ago. We do the same thing with galaxies. We can measure where they are and how fast they appear to be moving. So if we can turn it around and say when would all the galaxies have in the past, but in the same place as each other, then that's what we call the big bang, the beginning of the expansion of the universe. So what number did Hubble come up with for the age of the universe? Well, a little bit too small. So his estimate would have come out to be about two billion years. What? I got rocks in my garden that are old and two billion years. And that's the problem, right? So it was around the same time I think the 1930s that, you know, scientists were estimating the age of the Earth as being at least three billion years. So this was this was a problem. Yeah, that's a pretty big problem if the universe is younger than the Earth. Right. I'm no mathematician, but them sums is wrong. Do they are? Well, not for long though, because during the next half of the century, we developed better and better ways to measure the distance to galaxies and their speed. Although the path to better sums didn't run smooth. It was a very bumpy road. There were huge disagreements and people who were in the field at the time back in the 90s call this the Hubble Wars because people got so upset they had different figures coming from different groups working with slightly different techniques and people got really angry with each other. Everyone thought they were right. Of course, everybody thought they were right and, you know, they were disagreeing by factors of two in what they were coming up with, but they were absolutely convinced that they were correct. And finally enough, the way that the Hubble Wars were resolved was with the Hubble Space Telescope Hubble Wars. Scientists do love a good squabble though. No, they don't. Right. Well, it was the Hubble Space Telescope that finally won the Hubble Wars in the late 1990s. Astronomers used it to study a certain type of distant supernova, which are exploding white dwarf stars, think kind of like cosmic bombs, and this was about to blow the doors off astronomy. These particular exploding stars can very briefly outshine an entire galaxy, and so they're so bright that they let us see really far into space. This is AstroPhysicist Joe Duncley again. So there was this program going on to try and measure these very distant stars to see what the expansion rate of the universe was in the past. We thought, until up 20 years ago, that space should be slowing down, that even though it's expanding, it should be getting slower and slower because all of the stuff in it, all of the galaxies, the stars, their gravity, should tend to kind of slow the expansion of space. This was the great prediction. Two teams were studying these supernovae and their announcement at the time in 1998 shook cosmology to the core and also begged them the Nobel Prize. The surprising result is that the measurements of the distant supernova, far from telling us that the universe is slowing down, actually indicate that the universe is accelerating. And I remember sitting in the audience and I was absolutely amazed. Just incredible. I mean, all the astronomers walking around scratching their heads saying, this can't be right, surely it can't be right. I thought we had made an error either in the observations or more likely in the analysis. So we checked and rechecked our calculations and we couldn't find an error. Okay, so if the expansion rate is faster now, that means it must have been slower in the past. And so the universe is older than we thought. Yes, but the acceleration of the universe caused all manner of extra problems and left physicists pretty flabbergasted because they had no idea why. That was a huge, huge shock. Suddenly we see that it's expanding ever more quickly. There's something pushing space apart. And that's something is? We call it dark energy because we haven't got any other name to call it. And we don't have a clue what it is. So is dark energy? Is it a bit like Einstein's cosmological fudge in that it's just a name for something that we need to exist because the observations don't fit the theory? That's right. Although with Einstein's case, it was a mathematical symbol. It was a term in his equation. This is something physical that's out there. What's interesting is that many astronomers and cosmologists think that dark energy is Einstein's cosmological constant reinstated because you see he put a team to fight against gravity and stop the universe collapsing, keeping it stable. You put it in now with the expression universe and it's still fighting against gravity and it looks like it's winning. It's pushing the universe apart ever more quickly. And dark energy and dark matter, they're not the same thing, are they? Entirely different things. It's unfortunate that they both have the word dark in them. Dark matter, we are more confident that it exists. It's stuff that's invisible, that's holding galaxies together. We don't know what it's made of. But dark energy, we know a lot less about because we realize there's something missing in our understanding. So where are we at now? If you're asked, it's mastermind. What is the age of the universe? What do you say? I would say 13.8 billion years. Plus or minus a few hundred million. It's less than 14 billion. It's more than 13.6. Okay, well I've just given a plus or minus point two. Okay, so for me as an evolutionary biologist, like erimagens of a few hundred thousand years are, you know, that's quite a lot. Yeah, cosmologists deal with hundreds of millions between friends is nothing. So Dr. Fry, when it comes to the age of the universe, can we say case salt? Well, current calculations give 13.8 billion years, give or take a few hundred million. Part of that uncertainty rests on this weird thing called dark energy. It acts like a kind of anti-gravity that's speeding up the expansion of the universe. Nobody knows what it is or where it came from. A big scientific mystery waiting to be solved. Brilliant, we love scientific mysteries and dark energy really is one of the biggest. It is properly, properly outstanding in physics, isn't it? I think I'm just going to make uploads of stuff and give it cool names like dark energy. Because that's the thing, if it, I think part of the reason why they get away with this stuff is because they give it cool names. Cool names, yeah. In other subjects they just say unsolved problem. I think this is a genuine, a real issue because in genetics, absolutely terrible at making up names that are understandable. So you've got all sorts of terrible names. One can be an example. Linkage disequilibrium is one of the most fundamental concepts in biology. Linkage disequilibrium. Yeah, you kind of say it properly and then there's things like lode scores. Physicians come with big bangs. We talked about hairy black holes. Mathematics, especially for your dynamics, you've got quasi-geostrophic potential of autistic equations. That was amazing. Quasiggeostrophic potential of autistic equations. Yeah, you just, you know, you won't say what you see. Maybe we should all be a bit more physicist. The hairy black holes, that was a reference to an earlier episode, curious cases before people were actually. For any of you haven't heard that episode, hairy black holes really is a genuine thing that proper serious scientists talk about conferences and stuff with a straight face. Yeah, that was the episode in which we threw you into black holes, isn't it? I seem to remember it. Happy days. Anyway, we were talking about the speed of galaxies in that episode, but crammed into it into the 12 minutes. We didn't get time to talk about how physicists actually calculate their distances. And it's a really good story there, because it involves the early pioneering work of a female astronomer called Henrietta Swan-Leavitt. Now, Joe Duncley was one of the physicists from Princeton that was talking to me in that episode. And this is what Joe told me about Henrietta Swan-Leavitt. So she's a fantastic astronomer. So she was working at the Harvard University Observatory, the Radcliffe Observatory, around the turn of the last century. And she was part of this group of women called the Harvard Computers, who worked incredibly hard on astronomical data that was around at the time. They weren't allowed to operate the telescopes because they were women, but they were allowed to analyze the data. To me, that's almost the more fun job is to find out the new science that's the junior data. Anyway, so she was working at Harvard. She was also deaf, which was kind of fascinating, as were actually a number of the other astronomers working out at the time. And she, very carefully studied the behavior of these stars, called sephid stars, and these stars are pulsating stars. And she discovered this particular relationship between the rate of pulsation of these stars and how bright they are. So she found this incredibly direct relationship that says the brighter the star is, the more rapidly it pulsates. And this relationship is now increasingly being referred to as the leave at law, because it's actually completely fundamental to our understanding of the growth of space and the existence of a big bang. So she discovered this relationship, and she did it by looking at these stars in both our galaxy and the large, Magellanic Cloud, our smallest nearby galaxy, and found this relationship. And it was this relationship between the brightness and the pulsation of these stars that then let Edwin Hubble connect up his observations of these galaxies containing these stars to figure out the universe was expanding. I'm interested in some of the social history in here, good, there's a couple of things. Right. How is it, you know, how is it that women were not allowed to look at, use the telescopes, but they were allowed to cronestodate it? What was the reasoning behind that, do you know? It was very common at the time that it was years before women were allowed to use telescopes. I think because people perhaps thought that manual labour was not what they should be doing. I suspect it was to do with thinking that women were not technically proficient enough to operate these large, you know, technical instruments, just ridiculous, but not inconsistent with attitudes at the time. Amazing. They weren't allowed to operate the telescopes, but they could do the sums. It's extraordinary actually how many stories there are of women whose work just got airbrushed out of history, really. He's an amazing programme about Ada Lovelace, who's sort of being reinstated as a pioneering edge of science. Now he's also interesting about Ada Lovelace, he's actually touring, who's kind of credited with all of these big ideas about computing. He completely saw how great Ada Lovelace's work was, and then she was sort of forgotten about for 50, 60 years until she's been sort of reinstated and put back, I think where she deserves to be. In my field, it's Roslyn Franklin, who was perhaps lacking in credit for her significant role in the discovery of the structure of DNA. Anyway, that's... You say perhaps there, I would say definitely. Yes, definitely. That's good to write to the question, because we got more extra stuff. The question was Simon Whitehead, what is the age of the universe? Now there was actually a second part to this question, which is even more brain bending, and I put it to Andrew Ponson to try and help us get our heads around it. If time is a relative concept, does the age of the universe depend on where in the universe we are, or is there no real answer? You know what, this is such a deep question, because it gets to the heart of relativity in the way that Einstein formulated general relativity. In principle, should depend on how you're moving around. That's one of the lessons from Einstein's relativity, which is after all, at the core of all the physics that we're talking about here, and one of the famous things about relativity is if you zip around the universe at near the speed of light, then you seem to kind of time travel into the future. So if I were to zip off at the speed of light and come back, I'd find that you had aged much more rapidly than I had. It's a trick that we often use in physics to keep us healthy on. So if you zip around the universe at near the speed of light, then yes, you would measure a different age for the universe. But in general, things in the universe aren't zipping around at the speed of light. They're expanding in a very uniform way, so that everything is really going through the same motions. And as a result, there really is just one age of the universe. Are you actually 85, Andrew? I couldn't possibly say. I don't know what just happened. This is beyond my tiny brain. Honestly, I get really, really heavily confused in conversations like that. You know what, though, I really think, I've said this before, but I really think that this is one of those times where you are limited by language. Because if you could just see all of the stuff in equations, it all makes perfect sense. Essentially, every time a physicist speaks, they're trying to translate what an equation is telling them. And there's limitations to that inevitably. We've talked about this many times. I just can't see it properly. I can't read that it looks like Harry Glyphics on a page to me. We have equations in biology. I know. Occasionally. Sort of. Yeah. We have a lot of conflict in biology as well. And one of the things that came up in that was the Hubble Wars. Not quite as exciting as the Star Wars, but for astrophysicism. They should have cooled them the Star Wars. This was the 90s. So they definitely, they missed a trick there. They did miss a trick. Physicism should have been more physicist about that one. But they're still arguing about the age of the universe. Love a Barney. They really do. Here's Joe Duncan again to tell me about it. There's an interesting disagreement right now today between the measurements you get from the motion of galaxies around us and the measurements we get looking right back as far as we can to the nearly the big bang. And this is like that's the cosmic microwave background, light that's the oldest light we can see. The two of them actually give slightly different estimates. They're both about 13.8, but they're just, they're different enough that we're a bit concerned as a community about the disagreement there. For example, the galaxies around us give an estimate of how far space is growing that's just a bit faster and a bit of a smaller age to the universe than light coming from the big bang tells us. So many of us are curious about whether that's telling us that something's wrong in our model or for the universe. And we're all eagerly looking forward to the next few years when we get ever more precise measurements of both the movement of galaxies and these alternative observations of the age. Is it the case that I mean are we just going to refine this number from now on in with better observations or is there a possibility that actually it's going to be something radically different? You know we don't yet know if there was something happening in the universe before it began expanding. There was some interesting theories that say well actually perhaps the universe has a past life you know of expanding and then contracting and expanding and contracting something that happened before what we call the big bang. You know we're just calling the age of the universe the time since our space around us began growing. It's possible that we'll find out that that's only a small part of the story. So that again fries my brain because we're sort of beyond science here aren't we isn't this sort of epistemological fantasy land? Well you certainly can't measure it can you if you've the universe is popping up and disappearing and popping up and disappearing and there's there's very little that science can do to get to grips with these kind of questions. Yeah yeah now all of these things they do come up on curious cases relatively often pretty much once per series big astrophysical questions we did have some some correspondence from the last series Jim Alkalelia again was on that when we talk about the speed of light and he I asked him to clear up one of the questions was sent in by Acurio. Now Jim the last time you came on curious cases we were talking about the speed of light being an absolute speed limit for the laws of physics for the universe now a few people wrote in and said while they had more specific versions but my idiot's biologist understanding of the question is what about cosmic inflation? Well so cosmic inflation is the idea that just after the big bang the universe expanded very very rapidly and then it slowed down to the normal rate we see it today. The thing is space expanding doesn't have to obey the speed of light barrier nothing can move within space faster than the speed of light but space itself can expand at any rate it's not moving into anything it's just you know if you look to the edge of the visible universe now the furthest we can see are the objects whose light has just reached us they're moving away from us at the speed of light beyond the edge of the visible universe is more universe but it's moving away from us faster than the speed of light it's not moving through space it's space itself that's expanding and that's okay and to the curious who are listening to that can you email Jim Alkalili directly please and just bypass Hannah and me and Michelle. Thanks Adam thank you very much I look forward to responding to those. It's good to need that Jim Alkalili it's almost like he's deserving of his level of fame and fortune. He absolutely is. Anyway to wrap up this series we have our last Curio of the Week. Rather than a prize Curio of the Week. Now a couple of episodes ago we were told about the existence of a very special place in New Zealand called Curio Bay which is the home of Hector's Dolphin. I don't actually know what Hector's Dolphin is do you? It's a type of dolphin okay it's there's there's like 40 species of dolphin and Hector's is one of them and it's mostly very rare right? I think it might be the rarest. The rarest so this was what Sarah Hockste told us as she was passing through. She wasn't passing through if I remember correctly it was her boy friend's brother who sent a postcard. Oh right oh yeah of course you're right they're all Curio's now all honorary Hector's Dolphin's Curio's. But it turns out other people have been to Curio Bay and can confirm the existence of this place so we actually had two people write in one was Martin Pamington he wrote thought I'd drip this discussion you had about Curio Bay as I fell asleep listening had to read this in the next day anyway my wife and I saw two Hector's Dolphins in Curio Bay in 2008 my wife stripped off and ran into the water to try and swim with them brackets very unlike her see photos below I'm not sure we wanted to know. Well so when has a taxed photo and when Michelle forwarded this email to us I opened it and I didn't read the email I just saw that there were four photos at the bottom and I clicked on them without any context and went nice seaside you know lovely looking New Zealand see next one woman in bra in in spume and thought right I need to read the context of the email the next two do actually have dolphins in them but I well well done to Martin's wife if any other Curio's want to sell it and does photographs of their spouses in states of undressed please please don't please please there was another one hi guys this is from Tom Blinco Curio Bay is much more interesting than just dolphins I visited there a few years ago and I was working New Zealand and there is a petrified forest and it's also home to a population of the yellow eyed penguin which is one of the rarest penguins attached as a photo I took of one of the penguins standing next to a petrified tree stump so there in that one photo he is collected all all the elements that he's describing all of the interesting things well done Tom who is an anesthetic registrar in west sixteemery thank you Tom now because Curio Bay has come up a couple of times at Michelle has been on Wikipedia and look it up that is the kind of quality research you can expect from Michelle Martin years of training decades of experience and she knows how to use Google so turns out this is the note that she's passed us turns out that Curio Bay is a designated site of scientific interest it's home to geological and environmental attractions of international significance there are some good things and there's the pet there it mentions the petrified forest I don't know if I know what petrified what that means you've got a forest and this one was what 180 million years old and the petrification process is it is it basically the same as similar to fossilisation it gets living tissue gets turned into stone how did it get fossilised though well I wish I could pretend that this was my knowledge but I am reading off Wikipedia now that Michelle handed to me the original forest was buried by massive floods of ash and volcanic debris either directly from a volcanic eruption or from later heavy rain on a barren volcanic mission and then was gradually replaced by silica to produce the fossils now exposed by the sea there you go so you've you're left with just sort of stones that are that were trees yeah that is actually pretty cool yeah and dolphins this sounds like a great place can we go can we get a trip a curious case is trip to Curio Bay in New Zealand our budget will stretch that one it's surely yes yes she's nodding that's the guarantee for Michelle that's guarantee right there are the New Zealand is the most fascinating place on earth for natural history partially because it's been isolated from anything else for about 88 million years and so all of the evolution that happened on New Zealand for the last 80 million years occurred in total isolation which is why they had so many darts flightless birds like the kiwi and the toatora and the cacapro and for more interesting facts you can listen to inside science but for curious cases that is the end of our series so it remains to thank a few people who have helped us along the way our production coordinator Maria Simon's our editor Deborah Cohen our studio manager today was Steve Greenwood and and of course there is Michelle there is Michelle who does the sterling job of organising us hurting us into the correct positions making it sound great and giving us printouts from Wikipedia when we need information we are back with series 10 oh my lord 10 should we have a little birthday party in Curio Bay yeah Steve you're up for it Michelle you're funding it thank you for all of your brilliant emails we do read them all do send us more we read all of them lots of the makers laugh a couple makers cry yeah we've had some great ones this this run we've had blue tongues we've had naked swimmers and Curio Bay we've also had don't forget the Curio of the week theme tune which we had last series which remains one of my favourite things of all time so stay in touch curious cases at bbsc.co.uk it's only taking me nine series to actually remember what our email address is we'll be back in May and subscribe to the podcast so you won't miss triumphant return I think it will be triumphant at let's see you in May this is the bbsc hello all you curious people I'm Jimuakalili and I just want to remind you that all the scientists of these curious cases don't just exist to answer your questions they're people they have lives too for the past seven years I've made it my business to find out about the life scientific what makes someone want to become a world authority on fungi sex or quantum gravity and of cross examined many of the experts on these curious cases so if you want to find out who these people are and what they do you might like to give the life scientific podcast a listen see what you think
