Welcome to the podcast version of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry series three episode four. The portly problem. The case of the portly problem. Today is an episode about being a little bit squidgy around the edges. Yeah. I think there's quite a lot of judgment coming in your voice. No, there isn't. I actually, you know what? Squidgy bums, especially like the fat rolls that you get on babies, I think it's the best thing in the world. Yes, but this is about middle-aged spread and I'm a 41 year old man, not a tiny baby. But what we're investigating in this program is not baby fat, which is super cute. It is. We're talking about the fat that you get when you hit middle-aged. The middle-aged spread, if you will. Yes. Yes, you're not quite there, are you? Although I do observe that your midriff is larger than that it normally is. It's an unborn child. And that one is... I thought it was just that. That by your head for lunch. Cool. I mean, I think it is still 90% curry. Perhaps we should get on with the show before this becomes an appropriate. Put your crystal away, Rutherford. We've got a case to answer. Oh, I'm sorry. Yes. In fact, this is a follow-up from a question in the last series. Why is everything in space round in which we discovered that everything in space isn't in fact round or spherical at all, but a little bit fat around the middle. I may have made some mild and light hearted comparisons. You certainly did and they hurt me. Anyway, this led to the following email from Bart Johnson, a fellow scientist from New Zealand. Having just listened to a study in spheres, a question occurred to me. Why do we have middle-aged spread? Not suggesting that either of you would have any personal experience with the subject, despite Dr. Fry's pointed comments during the above-mentioned episode, but it does seem to be a phenomenon that is widespread. Why is it so common? They were pointed, weren't they Bart? It was just a friendly jushing, I don't know. Yes, well, you see, I'm not actually middle-aged, according to the Oxford English dictionary. Middle-aged is the period between 45 and 65. Ah, but the Collins English dictionary list it between the ages of 40 and 60. How old are you, again, Milton? 41. Yes, well, anyway, two things here for us to investigate. First, why does middle-aged spread happen at middle-aged? And why does it gather around our middle? But first, let's get back to the basics. What exactly is fat? Here is Steve Bloom, Professor of Medicine at Imperial College London. So fat is the place where you store energy. It is a mixture of carbon and hydrogen, and both of those can be oxidized in your body to produce lots of energy. Fat isn't of itself unhealthy. If we were an Arctic animal, let's take a walrus, they're massively covered with fat because it does indeed insulate you from the cold, and walrus' milk has to be very, very rich because if the baby isn't allowed to put on fat, extremely rapidly, it just frees his to death. So if we take the walrus and it isn't fat, it will die out. So there's nothing intrinsically wrong with fat, but our metabolism is adjusted for us not having too much of it. OK, so fat is not intrinsically bad, but at the same time, we're not walruses. What are we, you are? Speak for yourself, and unlike walruses, we can always pop a coat on if we need to feel warm. As Steve points out, many of us are fatter than we need to be, but anyway, we owe much of our understanding of the biology of fat to a not-so-little critter discovered in 1949. A giant overeating mouse was found in a lab colony and was named obese, a bit judgmental if you ask me, but these giant mice had a genetic mutation that caused them to weigh three times more than normal mice with an insatiable appetite. In 1994, the mutant gene responsible was found called OB, which was causing these mice to grow too much white adipose tissue, aka white fat. But the key discovery was that this white fat was actually releasing a hormone called leptin. Here is Aaron Cypest, an obesity investigator at the National Institutes of Health in Maryland. It's hard to explain just how much of a revolution this was in our thinking, because basically before 1990, white fat, which is all of our bodies, and at one level is the largest organ in our bodies, white fat was thought to be a neutral repository for fat calories. And that's all it did. And then what happened was with the discovery of leptin, it was now understood that there's a hormone being released by white fat, going to the brain and telling the brain, this is how much energy is being stored by the body. The way I like to think of white fat, and it applies to every other organ in the body too, is that there's a principle function that a tissue has. In the case of white fat, its function is to store calories. But just as important, they release hormones. They're talking to other organs in the body and telling them what's going on. So white fat, one of its principle roles to say, these are how many calories you have in your body. And as a result, you should either eat more or eat less. I mean, there's a lot of things that the hormones, such as leptin and now 40 to 50 others have been discovered in the last 25 years are coming from the white fat. So your fat tells you if you're too fat. Yes, that is the idea. Why do you get middle-aged bread, then, and these messages not getting through? Well, that's very good question back to Aaron. Unfortunately, what we find is that in most obese people, they have become resistant to leptin. And the brain will say, no, I'm going to not stop you from eating. The fact is, though, there are certain circumstances where there is no leptin resistance and treatment with leptin has been an incredible benefit. Right. Okay, some overweight people have leptin resistance. But is that the reason why people get middle-aged bread? Not exactly, because not everyone who's overweight has leptin problems. The issue is that alongside these leptin signals telling us that we're full, we also have tons of reward signals like dopamine in our brains telling us to eat the rest of that pizza because it's just super tasty. But of course, there's also the fact that armatabillism slows down in middle-aged, which means that even if you do the same amount of exercise when you're 50 as you did when you're 30, you will still gain weight. Life can be cruel like that. Indeed, it can, but doesn't really matter if we're a bit squidgy around the middle. Here's Steve Bloom again. About 15 years ago, some people did large-scale studies, epidemiologists, identified the fact that a fat tummy gave rise to early death and nobody understood why. We've known that being overweight isn't a good idea, but nobody had quite connected it to the specific fat that's found inside your abdomen, which gives rise to pot belly. And indeed, another aspect of this is that a fat bum is good for you. So if you took two people side-by-side, who are both a bit podgy around the edges, and one of whom had big hips, big bum, and the other just had a big pot belly, an apple in a pair, if you like, in terms of their shapes. The apple is much more unhealthy. Yes, that is correct, and will knock five years off their life. So you can talk about bad fat and good fat. And now the next question is exactly what do we mean? I thought all fat was the same, one might say, but it isn't. The fat inside your tummy is bad for you. It is associated with increase of cancer. It's associated with diabetes. It's associated with heart disease and high blood pressure. And if you could only move your fat about, it'd be a very good idea, but I've no idea how to do that. Yes, that's a bit disappointing, isn't it? Well, one thing is for sure, you do tend to see a difference in factor-posites in men and women. So women tend to be pairs and men are much more likely to be apples. But after men and women, estrogen levels drop, women can start to put on weight around their middles and become a bit more apple-y. So we know that our metabolism changes over time, and we know that our body shapes change as well. And Aaron Cypest is leading a project to map our body fat as it changes. We're developing a fat atlas, or as we like to call it a fatlas. What we're doing is we're using a different kind of technology called PETCT. And what that allows us to do is see the fat tissue, but also measure the metabolic activity of the tissue. And we can see that even within the belly fat, there are four different types of fat in that region. There's the one that's under the skin that's called the subcutaneous fat, and then there's omenthal fat, which is what is over the stomach, and then there's the mesenteric fat, which is around the intestines, and then there's the retroperitoneal fat that's near the kidneys. And each one of those four is different in terms of its function, and the risk it has for complications related to obesity. Now Aaron mentioned subcutaneous fat. That's the kind of cushioning fat that creates your pear shapes. And then there's the bad fat, the visceral fat, which forms inside our belly around our organs and makes you into that apple shape. True, but there's another kind of good fat that Aaron is particularly interested in, the kind of fat that makes you thin. I'm sorry, what? Brown fat. Yes, brown fat burns calories directly to produce heat, rather than storing them first and then releasing them during exercise. Brown fat is especially important in babies, because they can't move around much to exercise or shiver to keep warm. And as children get older, their brown fat increases, eventually peaking during adolescence. Okay, so is brown fat the reason why teenagers can eat whatever they want without putting on weight? Well, that is one hypothesis, yes, but it's never that simple, because some teens can't eat everything that they want and not put on weight. And even those who can, or like me, could, used to be able to, as we get older, sadly, everything does change. From late adolescence down into adulthood, for reasons that nobody really knows right now, the amount of brown fat in the body decreases. And this decline in the amount of brown fat in the body is notable, particularly in men, where young men age 20, for example, can have a large amount of brown fat. But by the time they're 30, 35, it appears that it's not there in much quantity anymore. If the brown fat deposits get smaller as we age, how does this relate to overall body shape? Because this whole idea, this whole program is about middle-aged spread, but you're talking about 20-year-olds who generally don't have middle-aged spread. The question is, does the decline in the amount of brown fat in the body in the 20 to 30 age range then lead to the middle-aged spread that develops later on? And that really is the multi-billion-dollar slash pound question that we have in our field, is that it appears generally that people who are thinner have more detectable brown fat in their bodies. So right now, many of us believe that it's the brown fat that's associated with preventing potentially the middle-aged spread. And in the UK, here in Britain, we sometimes refer to having this middle-aged spread as being a beer belly, specifically in men. Is that a real thing or is that simply overeating in general or should be stuck drink and beer? Please say no. Well, as a person treats people with obesity as well, I am on the position of saying that people can eat just about anything they like. The challenge is not eating too much. So is beer okay? Sure. But typically people drink more beer and take in, therefore, more calories from beer than their body needs and then that'll eventually lead to the spread. I was going to just cut you off after you said beer is okay, but you know, I let you finish for the purposes of medical honesty there. So, Dr. Radford, in answer to the question, what causes middle-aged spread? Can we say K-Song? Well, the simple answer is that as we get older, our metabolism slows down, we do less exercise than the scales tend to literally start tipping in the wrong direction. However, not all fat is equal in being a pear shape with a big bum, it is healthier than being an apple with a large tummy. And people who hang onto their baby brown fat are thinner than those who lose it. You can have your crisps back now. You know one bit full up, thanks. No, I'll let them. So that was episode four of season three of the curious cases of Fry and Rutherford's. I think we we really got to the number of it there, didn't we? Well, yeah, I tell you what I found out, I didn't have enough brown fat when I was a teenager. I was super podgy around the edges. Were you? Yeah. But you're pretty lean now apart from the human growing inside of you. It does tend to damage one's skinny, jean wearing opportunities, big, the hardest thing I found about that program. Tell me. It was not singing. I like big butts on a cannot lie. No, whether but the candy knife. I'm sorry. All the way through it. I think you know it was not eating the crisp. I've been sat here for the entirety of our good. They're a bit stale, but I felt you too were finding it hard to oppress the urge to say I like big butts on a cannot lie. Actually, you know what? That is not something I suffered from. Thank you for listening to the curious cases episode four of Rutherford and Fry and please remember to send us your own curious cases. Indeed, send them to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk and we just like to thank our producer Michelle Martin who is basically made of brilliant. Yes. Made of brilliant. And also to look at BBC.com slash future where you can find loads of videos and articles by both Hannah and me and all sorts of super awesome stuff. That's the end. Bye. Say goodbye. Bye.
