I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. Hello, Curios. We've got a special, brrr, chilly, double parter with you. Ball button press record. You're in press record button. Who invited Bob? I don't know, he just turns up. He's ready for us. Hello, Curios. We have a double brrr, chilly cold episode. Is this coming for you now? See, now this is what happens when you get to series 15. You get to... You get the kind of genius idea, right? To not just link two episodes together by theme, but by single word, right? Because cold, what are you thinking? What could that mean? What could that mean? Could it mean cold brrrr? Or could it mean... Cold sneezing? Cold sneezing. Uh-huh. Shell Martin, producer, extraordinary. Couldn't decide. So, so, so, I'll just do both. Just do both. Yeah, we've got some juicy history. What's the talking about how stinky the past was? That's fine. That's in the first episode. And the second, in which we're going to be thinking about the brrrr actual cold temperature cold. Being cold, being chilly. Yes. Yeah. And I've got your smirking. I'm looking across the booth. Michelle's laughing. I've got a feeling that this isn't going to go my way. I think it's been a long time since something has been done to you. I don't, and I think it's a... If I've got a little plan, let's put it away. Good little plan. Plan may or may not come together, but I've got a little plan. I'm not enjoying this already. Anyway, here's part one, which is about Sneasy Colds. We have two cold cases for you over the next couple of episodes of Rutherford and Bright. Yes, the first bound to go viral is about the common cold. Yes, we've had lots of questions about the cold virus. Sententicuriouscases at BBC.co.uk over the past year, including this one from Alice and Evans from St Albans. Yes, I suppose a cold is called a cold because we catch it in the winter, but why is it that we get more cold in the winter than in the summer? That question in from Dr Zeus. The sun did not shine. It was too wet to play, so we sat in the house all cold, cold, wet day. Quite. Okay. To kick us off in earnest, though. I, quiz biologist Jonathan Ball about what a cold actually is. And it turns out it's really not one thing at all. There's probably more than 200 different viruses that cause the symptoms of a common cold. And that includes strangely enough the influenza virus. So some people can actually have the flu and experience very mild symptoms. But I mean, in a inter-ooth, about 50% of the infections that we have in a typical winter season that we think are cold virus. It is caused by the common cold virus, which is a rhino virus. Is it called a rhino virus because of the nose? Indeed, rhinoceros, rhino, yes, the nose. And the other types, I mean, said the coronavirus that, of course, has been in the news at a great deal this year. That also can be the cause of a common cold, too. It can. So we have four human coronaviruses that circulate around the globe and do cause the symptoms of a common cold. They can also be associated with more serious disease, but that's quite rare. Okay. So there's different strains of each one? Lots of different strains of each one, which means each year, that's why we can end up with one, two, three, maybe even more colds. Yes, and the key thing is that this new coronavirus, which is called COVID-19 now, is not a human virus. It's jumped from animals to humans. Yeah, which means that we haven't yet evolved immunity to it. Right. So in humans, there are so many common viruses that cause a cold. And reality we're describing the symptoms, rather than the viruses themselves. Yeah, that's right. All of those common cold viruses, they essentially have the same effects. Block nose, the headache, the high temperatures. Snarts, so much, snarts. Can we talk about the snarts? No. Okay, well, we'll find out how the cold virus causes some of the symptoms later. But first, let's look at the history of how viruses were first discovered. Viruses came to light, surprisingly late in the history of medicine. Before then, many theories abounded as to the root cause of infectious diseases. One centered on the noxious hay is called miasma, as medical historian Claire Jones explains. So miasma theory was really that disease came from poisonous air. Suspended particles of decaying matter would create a foul vapor, and that foul vapor caused the disease. So the miasma theory emerged in the medieval periods, so we see plague doctors, for example, with masks. They were made largely of leather or different materials that covered the face. I mean, if you see a picture of a plague mask from a medieval period, it's quite a scary sort of image with a long beak that covered the nose. So bird-like, and that beak was often filled with popery or nice smelling salts, so that the bad air, the bad smells, couldn't permeate, and therefore infect the person that was wearing it. And they were often doctors that would go and see a lot of ill people suffering from plague. I take it, there were a lot of bad smells around at that time. Yeah, history really stank. You have poor sanitation in medieval times, stinky animals everywhere, people pooping out of windows, people pooping out of windows. Are you sure? Not really, but then later during the industrial revolution, you got urchins covered in cold dust. Just something like that history. London, after a particularly hot and smelly summer, the Thames became known as the Great Stinky. I think it was the Great Stink, but okay, let's move on. I'm not done yet, because of course, along with dirty conditions, came disease. And at the time, it would have been easy to link that directly to the smell. For example, malaria literally means bad air, malarea. And my asthma theory lasted for a very long time with some very famous proponents. Florence Nightingale held strongly onto her belief that disease was in the air, the bad air right up until her death in 1910. So there are people that still hang onto my asthma theory largely, because the practice of removing dirty things and cleaning things up does actually remove the disease. So the practice almost validates the theory, even though it's not quite correct. Okay, so she thought that by keeping hospitals clean, you're removing bad air, whereas actually you're just killing germs. Right, so a few germ theories began to emerge back in the medieval age in the Middle East, but it took a long time for the idea to catch on in the West. One of the pioneers was the chemist Louis Pasteur, who, being French, was very interested in wine. During his experiments, Pasteur proved that wine and other beverages would go off, if they were boiled with the lid off, but stayed fresh if it was kept on. Tiny germs floating about in the air were to blame, he said, resulting in spoiled milk and sour wine, heaven for fend. He went on to patent his own pasteurisation method to combat the diseases of wine, as he called them, in 1865, and later discovered that germs could also be responsible for human diseases. The first to be identified were bacterial epidemics of typhoid, cholera and anthrax were traced to specific microorganisms, but it took much longer to discover viruses, because they posed a much bigger challenge. Le Boriciusi and Tius found it quite difficult to isolate viruses, because they were smaller, essentially, than bacterial organisms. But from about the 1880s and 1890s, you see different kinds of viruses identified. Largely through filtration, because once they'd filtered out the bacteria, they identified that something was still present, which wasn't bacterial. But really, the biggest developments come in the 20th century in virology, when you get more powerful microscopes, electro microscopes, that can see smaller and smaller microorganisms, and really the late 20th century is considered the golden age, if you like, of virology, where diseases like hepatitis B began to be isolated. Wait, we didn't really understand viruses until we had lectron microscopes. Yeah, they are really, really tiny things. And yet they make us feel so bad. Okay, now that we have identified viruses, what exactly are they? That was my next question for the neurologist Jonathan Ball. If you were to look at a virus down in microscope, what would you actually see? It depends on the type of virus. So a rhino virus will have a very defined structure. It will look a bit like one of the old-fashioned footballs. Do you remember some of the listeners will remember? But the other ones. Yeah, that's the ones. The ones that really hurt your head when you used to hurt them. But often you can also see spikes coming out of these viruses. And those spikes are the things that your immune system likes to recognise to kill the virus. So you make antibodies to lock on and kill the virus. But they're also the thing that the virus uses often to get into your cell to infect you. So it's a bit like how a key fits into a lock to open the door to allow the virus in. So we like to think of the lock and key hypothesis. So each virus has a good fit for its particular lock that allows it to get into a cell. And what actually are they? What's inside these blobs? So inside these blobs, they're literally a little protein shell. That is designed simply to deliver the genome of the virus into the cell that they're trying to infect. And once that genome gets inside, they either rely on your cell's machinery to replicate. Or they take their own special proteins, their own enzymes into the cell with them. And then start to replicate their genomes so they're quite crafty little levels. Yeah, they are crafty. But our immune system is pretty crafty too. It learns via exposure to pathogens and then deploys all of its weaponry the next time it comes across them. Yeah, but interestingly, it's often the reaction of our immune system that causes all those miserable symptoms. Wendy Barkley is a virologist who studies the flu and she told me that when it comes to colds, our body is its own worst enemy. What's interesting about a cold is that a lot of the symptoms that we get are actually our own bodies overreacting to the infection. So that when you feel hot feverish, achy and even the sore throat is contributed to by the damage that your immune system is doing in its ability to sort of rally bluntly overreact to this. When you get infected by bacterial viruses, your immune system and your cells respond because they come under a lot of stress. And one of the things that gets made are these reactive oxygen species. And they bounce about doing quite a lot of damage. Those are sort of like loose bullets if you like chemical bullets that go around affecting other part of your healthy body. So the idea of medications actually is to just limit the damage so that you don't feel so bad. Stupid immune system. Quite. So a lot of the over-the-counter medication is attacking the symptoms which are generated by our own immune system. Yes, although some reactions can be useful. So for example, if you have a fever, then that can help kill off some of the virus. As long as your body doesn't get so hot that it damages itself. Exactly. But if we're talking about symptoms, there's one in particular which the common cold really has hijacked. The sneeze reflex really is one of the kind of basic reflexes that we have in the body. Carl Filpott is a rhinologist, that's a nose doctor to you and me. And as he explains, sneezing is a very useful reflex when it comes to expelling troublesome intruders. Pepper, pollen, dust mite particles, animal dander, connectors, triggers for sneezing, with therefore expelling that foreign material out and not suggesting it into the body. So it's a defense mechanism essentially. If you irritate the front of the nose through touch. So if you've ever gone through the unpleasant sensation of trimming nasal hairs that can trigger a sneeze reflex. Yes, well I wouldn't know anything about that. But hairy nostrils aside, when it comes to the common cold, these crafty viruses have hijacked this natural defense mechanism for their own evil ends. The virus infects the cell in the nose, inflames the tissue, irritates the lining and triggers the sneeze. The virus obviously is quite clever in the sense that it's kind of triggering that irritant effect which is promoting the sneeze to happen. Therefore you're then expelling all these particles containing more of the virus to pass onto other people. So cold viruses have evolved to make you sneeze just so they can spread? Yes, it's very clever in an evil kind of way. Well that is the best type of clever. Okay, but we still have an answer to Alison's question, why is it that we get more colds in the winter than the summer? To finish this week's case, I put her query to our team of the rogestes. There is no doubt that for things like flu and rhinovirus colds, we detect more of them in people in the winter. So outside of the body, when viruses are moving from one person to the next, they're incredibly fragile. They fall apart because they're so simple, they're just like a little bag of genetic material and they just collapse. In the sunshine, when there's a lot of ultraviolet radiation, the viruses' genetic material can get chopped up into pieces. And so one reason why there might be more viruses in the winter is that there's less sunshine. When winter comes, we have reduced daylight hours, so the nights draw in and we have less daylight. Then that seems to impact on your ability to produce things like vitamin D and it has a knock-on effect in terms of your immune response. So that's potentially part of the answer. But there's also other things that we do differently in the winter, so we do tend to all come inside and we perhaps packed more closely to each other indoors. And so the chances of a virus coming out from my nose and hopping into yours is greater if we're standing right next to each other than if we're all running around in the fields or lying on the beach. So Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to why we get more colds in winter, can we say case-sold? Well, Dr. Sneezy, the common cold is caused by over 200 different viruses. But Rhinovirus is the most common common cold. During winter, we shelter inside in more crowded places which helps the virus to spread. But some of the sunshine can break down cold and flu organisms, so they don't survive as long outside the body. Next week we'll be catching a different kind of chill when we discover why some people feel are cold more than others. Burr. Do you know what I like about that story? Which one? Is that Pastor came up with a technique for something and then just called it pasteurization without any hint of irony or arrogant, you know, he just went straight in. It was the other way around in fact. The pasteurization already existed and he renamed himself. No, no, of course not. Oh, it was called Louis Pasteur. Don't you think it's quite bold though to name something after your first? You know, when you had your babies, did you get an appgar score? Yes. Right. Oh, that's after a nurse called appgar. Yes, yes, I love that. And it's a background and I can't remember what it stands for. But I just assumed it was it stood for all of the things it stands for. So it's basically when the baby comes out, it's like are they screaming? Are they eyes open? That kind of stuff. I'm rapidly tapped. That crinim's, they're good. Typing into Google, what it actually stands for. Have you ever thought about you could have reloafed the diation? What would that be? I have proposed in one of my books that there's a reloafers law and I've tried to make it catch on. It hasn't caught on. What's your law? It's when people talk about a gene for X in the press where X is a complex behavior disorder. It doesn't exist and nor does the gene. Like a gene for running wild. Exactly. Or the gene for believing in God. So wait, what's your law? But the gene doesn't exist. That the, yes, the gene doesn't exist. Okay. I mean, I think most laws are slightly more specific and a bit easier to communicate. Well, is there a prize law? No. Okay. So appcast stands for appearance, pulse, grimace, which is like reflexive irritability, rather than the baddie from the McDonald's adverts. Activity and respiration. But it was actually a person called appgar. Yeah. And like, they were like, okay, we need some kind of score system. Here are the things I think are important. Oh, I reckon I can link these to my name. Grimace doesn't quite work, but whatever. Well, on that very note, do you know what a photox neasers? No. Oh, looking at the light. Yeah. There is a gene for that. Brotherhoods law fulfilled. Well, no, but hang on. Brotherhoods law says there isn't a gene for that. Well, yeah, there isn't a gene for photoxneasing. There isn't, there is a genetic component to it. But it's not one gene. No, it's not one gene for anything. Brotherhoods law. Just heard it in action. Yeah, God, and you're not my most famous brother. I know, not even the top four. Greg. Margrick. Greg. Okay. Ernest. Here's the other one. Jimmy. Anyway. Jimmy, Jimmy, brotherhood. Right. What about seizing? Photoxneasing. So I get, I am a real photoxneaser. If I think of sneezes coming on, if I look at the sun, I can get, I can knock 10 out in a row. Anyway, look, look, we're just talking about backranims and appgar. Well, this photoxneasing, there's a backranim by appgar for this, which is called autosomal compelling helio ophthalmic outburst. What? Autosomal, which means it's happening to yourself in autosomal cells. Compelling means you can't avoid it. Oh my goodness. Helio ophthalmic generated by the sun and the eyes outburst the sneeze. What is the acronym? That is so now. A-chu. A-chu. That's brilliant. I'm dying inside. That's absolutely brilliant. Anyway, look, we had a whole ton of other questions about colds and about sneezing and about snort and Michelle spoke to Carl Philpott. We don't actually know why photoxneasing exists, so this is what Carl said. Sometimes bright light can trigger a sneeze reflex. We do see that particularly in clinical practice when you, you know, you pass a camera light into the nose to examine the nose carefully and often people will feel the sneeze reflex coming on. So one of the things I always say is, you know, please don't be angry again to sneeze because when there's a rod this time to their nose, we don't want them impaling themselves on the on the underscope. Okay, so here's another question. Should you stop a sneeze? You know, when you kind of hold it back on purpose? So I've seen at least one person in my clinic who fractured these eye socket from a very excessive sneeze, and I have seen one case reporting a medical journal where someone caused a leak of brain fluid from a very heavy sneeze. So that doesn't sound like something you want to do. Not something you really want to do now. So I guess letting it out is probably the best thing. That is horrendous. Leaking brain fluid. That's bad. You know what? I used to have this colleague who did the exact opposite of what Kyle was just describing. And whenever he sneezed, he wouldn't only just, you know, let it out. He would let it out and search me and go, and it made me so angry. I think you're making a conscious decision to do that. I think so too. That's rude. That's not okay. That's the other plan office. Yeah. And then those stats, which I haven't looked up, where it says that if you sneeze, you're propelling moisture particles, probably containing virus at 100 million miles per hour. That number seems high. That's what it says in my research, which I've just made up from my head. So we had lots of other questions about colds. One of them from Anna Redmond, from Lechworth Garden City. She asked, where is not comes from, you know, and why do we have it? Now, because I am a very delicate flower and cannot handle any conversations about snows, or thinking about it without wretching, I'm just going to take off my earphones now, because I actively don't want to hear this. All of us have something called the mucousidory train inside our nose. Mucous is produced in the surface layer of the nose and the sinuses. And every day, all of us produce about a pint and a half of mucous in our nose and sinuses. And that travels across the little fine hair endings that live on the surface of all the cells that line the nose and sinuses. And they beat in coordination the mucous layer towards the back of the nose. So the idea is that that mucous layer picks up the sort of muck and debris from the world around us and transports it to the back of the nose where you then swallow it. So every day, a normal person produces about a pint and a half of mucous that they swallow, naturally. And then of course, it goes down to the stomach where stomach acid hopefully eliminates it and it's passed out safely through the digestive tract. Wow, that's kind of both amazing and disgusting at the same time. Anyway, Anna had many more questions about Snot, including how her children's tiny noses are able to produce quite so much of it. Well, I think in context of children, really what children experience is that joy of exchanging common bacteria and mark between each other. So children, as many parents will know, commonly have the sort of train tracks of mucous appearing from their nose. It's just really sort of them learning to go to a cape with all the kind of new bacteria and things that they're encountering in the world around them and adapting to that. In conjunction with that, we have the adenoid tissue at the back of the nose, which are like sort of tonsils at the back of the nose and in children, they tend to be kind of bigger because children are encountering all these new things all the time. And it's that sort of adaptation of their immune system to the world around them. Now, listeners, curious. Welcome to the curious cases of rutherford, because fry has actually left the studio literally wretching. He's standing outside. Oh, no, she's decided to come back. She was, it was just at the point where he's described how everyone swallows a pint and a half of snot a day. Welcome back, Dr. Fry. How are you? Good for not hearing that. Let's move on, shall we? Okay. So, another question. I don't feel we've quite finished these, these extra sections there. That was pretty gross, but you were, honestly, she was literally wretching. I just can't, I just really sense about that kind of handle it. So it's blood and snot. There are two things you really like. You know, blood doesn't make me wretch. Blood just makes me feel woozy. Blood, snot and horror films. Very difficult. I have to be terrible in a war. Oh, I don't. For Halloween, let's make a horror film, really scary horror film about blood and snot. So we're going to run the nose. Do you not think it's a valid question where your children produce all that snot from? I had a ridiculous thought. I don't think I'm the first person to think this, but there's so much of it. There must be some way of mining it. Oh, no, please. No, I can't. There must be something useful. No, I can't. I can't. I'm sorry. Anyway, there's a big ad lubricant. No, this is not, maybe for some industrial purpose. Anyway, Tracy or Dr. Walrich, if we're being formal, she had another question that we couldn't quite fit into the radio programme. She said, can you get catch your call from going outside with her? No, I think this is much more interesting. I'm getting tired of people saying that I'll catch a flu if I go outside with my hair wear. Guess my response is no, I'll catch a cold if I pick up a virus. Is she right? Let's see. I asked for all just Jonathan Bull. There is a reasonable amount of evidence out there that if you get cold, it does make you more susceptible to a cold. Catch a chill. Well, if it reduces your temperature sufficiently, then that could be a risk. One of the consequences of this reduced temperature is the fact that you stress your body. We know that stress isn't good for your immune system. Your immunity is reduced slightly. That just allows the viruses to attack. And again, inside your body, there are these molecules which can potentially fight off viruses. They're released when your cells think that they're being attacked. We suspect that that mechanism is reduced if you reduce body temperature or you have some stress. I always thought my mum was talking nonsense. Well, maybe not. Just to be clear, she talks nonsense and awful lot of the time. Does she listen to the podcast? This one? Yeah. Yeah. But either way, I think Mrs. Fry is awesome. Me too. She actually is, you know. She's actually very good. Very good as a human. Right, should we do cure the week? I think we probably should because we've got a lot of, I think that's enough snot for many, many series. That jingle, of course, for cure over the week, we've played it hundreds of times by Jeff Perkins, who makes another appearance in just a second because a few weeks ago, we asked you to, well, we didn't ask you. No, we didn't ask. We were just having a random conversation. And as part of it, mentioned the fact that there aren't any songs about dopamine. How wrong we were and how much you have delighted in proving us wrong. Yes. Yes. Well, it turns out that there are lots of songs about dopamine, mostly because you've written them. Some really honorable mentions go to Michael Van der Bulk, Christoph Rans, Thomas Wells as well, amazing submissions. Well, let's hear from Jeff Perkins, who wrote the theme tune and is now written. I'm saying the theme, she said he did, he's saying the theme tune as well. And he's been at it again, here he is. He says, Dimash L and her performing professors, kind of you. I'm actually an association professor, but that's fine. Good to give me a, I'm not a professor of any sort. And it seems but an eye blink, but apparently a million years has passed since I last sent a song. I attached it to the song for the esteemed podcast, the curious case of Brother Finn and Fry. It's called Dope, a mean. I mean, he's already one as way to my heart. What because of dope, what am I? Because it's like that's so dope. Yeah. Oh, a mean as an average. Yeah, but it could also be like, I mean dope. I mean, yeah. Anyway, he did a video for it as well, which he put on YouTube. I'd say the video lacks the production. What's the video? Let's put it this way. It's not as good as the song. Let's hear the song. What was that last line? You've reduced our fashion to a sequence of ones and nots. Now you know what? It's extraordinary about Jeff Bucking. When the originally sent in that cure of the wheat jingle, we didn't have any badges. So he's pre-batch. He's pre-batch a cure of the wheat. That is criminal, frankly, that he doesn't have a badge. If any cure of all time should have a badge. Jeff, you can have a badge. Yeah, what's the status of gold versus purple badges these days? Have we assessed the inventory? Michelle? I think Jeff should get gold because we do play his jingle every single week. Yeah, but we're not retrospectively awarding a badge and that's only for this jingle coming in now. It's like strictly come dancing. I want you to make the decision based on how they performed in the show. You're harsh. That's why they don't invite her on strictly to be a judge. Not the only reason to be honest. Now I'm calling this, Jeff gets a purple and a gold badge. What? Yeah, that's mad. Every week for 16 series. Fine, okay. Well then I've got another one to throw into the pile. This one I really love. This is from Dr Charlotte Reptum. She says, dear Dr's brother and brother and the in-imitable, Michelle, never say that word, does it? It's a hard word to say. In-imitable. In-imitable. Dear Dr's brother, for the bride and in-imitable, Michelle, imagine my delight when you ask a song about dopamine or serotonin. As it just so happens, I wrote such a song years ago. The anterior horn of the lateral ventricle, a song celebrating the emerging property of affection undiminished by the squishy and turtle organs that make it happen. Here you go. Extending into the frontal lobe of my brain, and if it got damaged I wouldn't be quite as sane. Bringing spinal fluid to my dopamine receptors without them I would be quite susceptible to primal urges from memories I can't retain. It's forward of the corpus calosamander, both two. The ventricle developed from the talent's heaven on as I grew. But the anterior horn doesn't have coroplexes, it's a calmy spinal fluid so it draws from the next victim, but it's the protection, the emotional section is due. All of which is to say my brain makes an effort to love you. The anterior horn of the lateral ventricle keeps my forebrain working at its pinnacle and if I'm sick, then give me chlorofenical but there's no nice area here. You're my favourite source of dopamine, my dear. That is absolutely gorgeous. You're my favourite source of dopamine, my dear. The ability to rhyme chloramphenical with anything. I want to get some merch that says you're my favourite source of dopamine, my dear. I honestly, so lovely. How she describes herself very nearly, Dr Charlotte Rept and I think should be awarded an honorary Curio PhD immediately because the content of that song was both absolutely gorgeous and scientifically accurate. I don't think we've got the power to award honorary doctorates, but we do have the power to award gold, Curio badges and Charlotte, you have it one. There's hardly any left. I want to instigate the... We've already instigated the curious cases world records. Yeah, I think we... No, because I don't... Okay, because the thing is, if we claim to give out Curio PhDs, we'll have lots of people sending in their questionable mathematical proofs. I do get... And I already get a lot of that. Yes, I get a lot of evolutionary theories which are non-dawinian, which I don't want to encourage. They're all about 80 pages long and I don't really read any of them. So strange how all these people who come up with new ideas struggled to be succinct. Yes, anyway. But listen, Charlotte, Repton, you are so far... You're our Curio of the Week. You're also an honorary doctor of Curio's cases. Thank you, Phil. More than a lot of them, touch a tin mention in there, I thought that... I thought it was brilliant. Yeah, absolutely. Really lovely. stunning. Thank you very much, everyone, for your submissions. In the meantime, before we all next week send us in your questions, you can still apply to the case's world records, just not including hammering things through your face. And that's the end of Snot. We will never be talking about that again. See you next week. Bye! What are you interested in? And I mean really interested in... Really into box certificate pencils. Crinnell in Mania. So much so that if you see it or hold it or just think about it, then everything stops. And then one day it just vanished. Each week in the Boring Talks podcast, join me James Ward as I introduce a guest speaker to share their own fascination for a very niche subject. But what could it possibly be? From the personal droids of pencils and tevotext to the expectant sounds of old computer games loading, every talk is a varied and surprising treat. You know that? You're free. The Boring Talks. Subscribe right now on BBC Sounds.
