Welcome back to series three of the curious case of random football. I thought we were going with season three. Well, I know I listened back to it and I regretted our bold statements that we made during this football. Okay, series three then. Series three. And as we sense about this. And of course, in curious cases, what we do is we ask you the listener to send in your scientific queries, conundrums. Things you've always been curious about, the things you want us to investigate on your behalf. And we send them into curious cases at BBC.co.uk to either Dr Fry who's sitting over there. Or Dr Rutherford who is sitting over there. Hello. Now this question actually is something that I think for 90% of the population just doesn't really occur to us a lot of the time. So if I throw this microphone baffle at you now, just just a little test. Really? And go, you caught up with two hands. I know, I'm sorry, but I knew that I'd drop it if I tried to catch you with what the whole point is you're actually catching with them again. You're right hand. Like I just did. Indeed. This episode is about right and left handness and where it comes from. And it begins now. Hello, we're back for a brand new series and plenty more curious cases to solve. Thanks for all your excellent questions that you've sent into curious cases at BBC.co.uk for us to investigate. Yes, and they have been truly spectacular. And today we present for you the curious case of the sinister hand. Sent in from Neil Shepperson on the Twitter. He asks, What determines left or right handness? And why are asked lefties in the minority? Now this is a question that brought up so many interesting scientific mysteries that we're devoting not one, but two, a two-handed programme if you will to this extremely curious case. To start, maybe we should explain why this episode is called the sinister hand. Well, 90% of us are right-handed. Only 10% of us are left-handed. And lefties being in the minority haven't always had the easiest right. And I'm not just talking about fountain pens or using scissors. Yes, because sinister is Latin for left-handed. A word associated with evil. And meanwhile, left comes from the Anglo-Saxon word, Luft, which means weak. Luft. And the opposite in Latin is Dexter, which is always associated with skill and righteousness and dexterity. So Hannah, sinister or dexter, what handy use to write? At my right hand. How about throwing a ball? Badly with my right, even worse with my left. Now I'd like you to open this can of fizzy pop. Right hand again. Indeed. Okay, so this is all part of a longer test from which we can deduce that you are actually 100% right-handed, as indeed I am, although it's not true for everyone. Yes. Some people are mixed-handed. Indeed, only 62% of us prefer our right hand for every task, which does make both you and I add a mother-ford, pretty boring and quite average. So what makes us write or left-handed? Well, to start to answer today's question, I consulted a handy guide. I'm Chris McManus, Professor at Psychology at UCL. I'm right-handed. Okay. I have a left-handed daughter and a left-handed mother. And what about true ambidextrous? Are there people who are genuinely equally-handed? No, really. So all people have a preference. Yeah, I have a theory that ambidextrous don't exist. When I get people into my lab and I give them tests where they have to do things as quickly as possible with the right hand, quickly as possible with the left hand, I never find anybody who's equally good and equally fast with both hands. They're confusing being mixed-handed with being ambidextrous. What they mean is they write with their right hand and they throw with their left hand. We mostly talk about hand-edness here, but also there are lots of other hand-ednesses in the body, aren't they? Yes, we're full of asymmetries. In general, I tend to say that 10% of people are left-handed, 20% are left-footed, 30% are left-eyed, and 40% are left-eared. Oh, left-eyed? Gone. Explain left-eyed. Look through a keyhole and tell me which I use. I think I'm left. There you go, you're left-eyed. That's interesting. As I was talking to you just then, I realised that my arms were folded. Left hand tucking under my right armpit. Yep. And if I try and do it the other way, I actually can't even do it. I do this in lectures. I get them, first of all, to fold their arms. And when I fold my arms, my wristwatch on my left wrist is on top. Yep, me too. If I then say to people, now do it the other way around, I watch the whole audience and about a half a second later, there's a huge roar of laughter. They realise they can't actually work out how to do it. They feel so completely wrong. It was horrid. But when it comes to left-handedness, where does this one in ten ratio come from? Well, one way to investigate this mystery is to look back through our evolutionary past, which is exactly what Primatologist Professor Linda Marshant from Miami University has done. Now, Linda is a lefty and she began studying wild apes in Africa to try and find out where the left handers are in the minority there too. I sort of want to get an image in my mind imagining you at work. So, are you out in the jungle? Indeed. I am, and it's sweaty and buggy, and I love it. And my goal is to basically record everything that they do with their hands. And how do you determine then whether a chimp is left or right-handed? So, you're following Fifi. She's decided she's going to termite fish. And what lots of chimpanzees do is that they collect tools on their way to the termite mound. So, they arrive with their tools in their mouths and their hands. And then she's going to inspect the mound visually. She'll take a fingernail and she'll kind of probe. And what she tries to do is open up that tunnel. Then she takes the tool in her hand. This is where she's going to show her preference. And she's going to carefully insert that tool down to that tunnel. And there's all hell breaking loose in the termite mound. Because basically the soldiers know they're being invaded. And so, they're going to come rushing up and they're going to bite onto that tool with these very strong mandibles. If you've ever bitten by a termite soldier, you know you've been bitten. And so, they're holding on like heck and she's going to carefully pull it out. And then she's going to nibble those soldier termites off there. So, within an individual chimp, then, do you see a clear preference for one hand over the other? Tool use, they will show strong individual preferences. But then if you say, is it anything like the human condition where we are skewed like nine to one? Doesn't look like that at all. It's often more like a 50-50. Right, so chimp's are roughly equally split. Half-righties and half-southpores. But what about other animals now, Hannah? Right here, you've been conducting your own animal studies? Yes, I have on my dog, Molly. Although I wouldn't exactly call this experiment unmitigated succincts. Molly, the dog is now our most regular contributor to the curious case of humans. She's been demanding our own agent. Very scientifically-minded dog. She is indeed. And what I was trying to do with her was to apply what's known as the contests, which is used to determine lateral bias in dogs. Lachral bias, meaning... Poor-idness. Poor-idness. Whether they use their left or right paw. Okay, fine. So, what you do, you take a cone-shaped dog toy and you fill the inside with peanut butter and the dog has to hold the toy steady with a paw to try and get to the sweet treat on the inside, thus demonstrating a paw preference. Yes, except you didn't use peanut butter, did you? Did you? No. What did you use? I've got a go, ham. She's the most middle-class dog in history. She's a faulty dog. But look, this is not important. What is important is that she used her right paw. The preference of dogs is actually split down the middle, so 50% for their left and 50% for their right. So, dogs are about 50-50 when presented with delicate, test and quality pork products. However, not all animals are as perfectly balanced. An Australian study revealed that all some of the crested cockatudes were left footed. Humpback whales like to slap one of their flippers on the surface of the sea, and three-quarters of them choose their right. Some speckled wing butterflies have a left wing that is larger than the right, allowing them to fly in tight circles, dodging predators and increasing the chances of finding a mate. But, as far as we know, nowhere in the animal kingdom do we see this 1910 split between righties and lefties. So, when did this odd glitch crop up in our evolutionary past? A clue, Linda told me, came from an unusual source, the Andertal's teeth. When they look at the where pattern on the Andertal teeth, and you can't see my hands, but imagine if you could, I am going to anchor something in my teeth. Like a piece of meat. Exactly. Perfect. Imagine I'm clenching it in my teeth, and then because I'm a right-handed Andertal for you right now, I'm going to take my left hand, I'm going to pull it away from my teeth. In my right hand, I've got a knife, and I'm basically working this thing. Sewing cutting out meat. Yes, yes, and by accident, I scratch my insiders, so that there is damage on the insiders. And in some of those Andertals, we do get the reverse pattern. We see what would have been a left-handed Andertal, but the proportion of the population looks right. That is awesome. There is so much science hiding in the Andertal teeth. There certainly is. And these researchers calculated that 90% of Andertals were right-handed. Exactly the same ratio as humans today. But this ratio is a bit of a puzzle in an evolutionary sense. If only 10% of us are left-handed, it's not advantageous enough to become dominant, but not detrimental enough to have disappeared altogether. So I put this to our hand-edness expert, Chris McNannis. It's a very difficult percentage. If 50% of us were right-handed, there'd be nothing to explain. If 100% of us were right-handed, it'd be pretty easy. The real problem is that it's 90% and with all complex human behaviours, it's always a combination of genes and environment, the age-old nature of nurture. What do we think? We can begin to get at that one interestingly because of the work over the last 15, 20 years looking at fetuses in the womb. Because once real-time ultrasound scanning came into obstetrics, people realised they could watch the fetus behaving. The chap called Peter Hepa in Belfast did some wonderful stuff where he realised that often they were sucking their thumb, a 90% of them were sucking their right thumb. And when he followed them up five years later, they were right-handers and the ones who suck their left thumb were the left-handers. And this is in uterine in the womb. Oh, this is three months before birth, but that's a preference. It's not a skill. You don't suck your thumb skillfully. You just dig it in. Which leads us to say that there is definitely a genetic component to being left-handed. I think so, yes. Have we managed to identify any of the presumably many genes for hand-ed-ness? For a long while, we assume that had to be just one gene. And about four or five years ago, we did a study where we looked at about 6,000 individuals, couldn't find a single gene, which associated with being right-handed or left-handed. We came to the eventual conclusion that could well be as many as 40 or more genes, determining hand-ed-ness. So that's Chris McManus from University College London. And nowadays we can see natural selection in our DNA, but when you've got that many, it makes it very hard to spot. Sure, and this doesn't explain why left-handers have managed to survive from an evolutionary perspective with such a small ratio. There are some scenarios where being in a minority definitely has its advantages, like being a South-Paw and Boxing or playing tennis. Right-handers have to adapt their tactics to playing against lefties. Sure, but those sports aren't exactly an evolutionary precedent. I know, not really, though. This could also, of course, just be a random quirk. So, Dr. Frye, an answer to Neil Shepperson's question, why are us lefties in the minority? Case solved. Well, the precise ratio of one in ten left-handers is unique to humans. We do know it's partially genetic, but we're still trying to track down the precise combination of genes responsible. But how do these genes affect your brain? And does being left-handed includes your skills or your health? And that controversial question, dear listener, is what will be answering in the next episode of the curious cases of Rutherford and Frye? Quite unusual for us, really, Adam, to decide to do two episodes on a single question, a bit naughty, almost. Yeah, there was a point when this after this question came in, when we considered doing five episodes on hand-in-ness. Things, we have had quite a few left-handed questions, and there are a lot of different angles to it. That's right. In fact, someone wrote in saying that their cat only approached from the left side of the bed. It didn't specify whether the bed was against the wall or not, which was why we didn't specifically use this question. No, in the end, we went for the ones about neurology and genetics. Yes. The nighttime routine of our female and friend. Yes, because we also could have gone for the whole universal, why is the universe hand-dead, why are molecule-wise. Lots of stuff, anyway, lots of stuff. And lots of interesting stuff in the next episode. Yes, and thanks to our producer, Michelle Martin, and of course, don't forget to send us your scientific queries and conundrums to every single time I forget the email address. What is it? It's the name of our show at www.bbc.co.uk. CuriousCases at www.bbc.co.uk. Finally.
