I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. Science. I like it. MUSIC Hello, Curie A's, episode two. And in fact, episode two and three, because we're doing a double header on one of the strangest substances in the entire world. Yes, but read your mind of extra terrestrial objects. Read your mind of the strange things that live down at the depths of the ocean. A lot of... Look, mind-riding going on. We're doing two episodes on wood stuff, but I mean, the thing we're doing on actually doesn't feel weird at all. Because water, water, turns out really weird. It's super strange. And it's one of those episodes that we do every so often, and probably every series, where you think the question is, I don't know, kind of odd or pretty strange. My calendar, they're going to fill an entire hour with water chat. Yeah, and we all, there's so much more. Oh, boy. Here we go with the weirdness of water. MUSIC Today's curious case sent into curious cases at BBC.co.uk concerns one of the most curious substances in the whole universe. Yes, water, ubiquitous, essential, the very stuff of life. You probably don't give it much thought yet, as we are going to find out, water is mesmerisingly weird. So weird, in fact, that we need two episodes to wade through it all. That's the first pan of many of their listeners. Yes, we've had a surprisingly large volume. There's another one of questions about water, and we're going to dive in to answer as many as possible. But the main one comes from Neil Morton. He says, I don't really understand why water has so many properties on different scales, ranging from very large and cosmic to very small quantum and quarky. Could you help by zooming in and out of water to explain what is known about it? Well, Neil, we don't really understand that either. This stuff is everywhere. We are mostly made of water. The earth is covered in the stuff, and it's been raining for most of the summer. Yes, so we're not sort of study material, I think that's what we're saying, which means that you might imagine that science has a perfect understanding of the stuff. But you would be wrong. Forma physicist and author of H2O, a biography of water. Philip Ball explains, it looks deceptively simple. The water molecules, what could be simpler? But it is a really, really unusual liquid. The strange thing many years ago, when I trained as a physicist, I studied liquid state theory. So you might think, well, what's the archetypal liquid to study? It's got to be water, right? But everyone said to me, don't study water because water isn't like any other liquid. Stay away from water, they told me, because water, it does seem to defy all the rules. Now, we'd like rule defying, but let's start, as is customary with the very basics, what actually is water? Okay, well, it's not that hard. You've got an oxygen atom, two hydrogen atoms stuck to it. Water's transparent, it's tasteless, it's odorous, but there is a lot more to it. Here is me discussing the list with Trisha Hunt, a quantum physicist from the Victoria University in Wellington, New Zealand. All right, so very high boiling point. True. Strong surface tension. Yes. The solid is less dense than the liquid. That's true, that's why icebergs float universal solvents. Hmm, not 100% there, so water is a really good solvent, but actually it's not universal. Otherwise, we couldn't hold water in our bodies, so our cells need to be able to contain water. So things that are non-polar are not very well dissolved in water. Yeah, I mean, it would be a bit messy if I cells dissolved. Yes, certainly. And oil too, right? Oil and water don't want to mix. Okay, here's a slightly strange one. Water is most dense at four degrees C, even though it becomes solid at zero. That's true. There are 15 also at different types of ice. That is true. Water is unusual in that it has so many solid forms. Very good at storing energy. Yes, yes. Got a high heat capacity. Well, that is all very interesting, but you still haven't told me why it's weird. Yes, I have. No, I feel like you've just read me out a list from a textbook. Yeah, but that list is what makes water weird. If you compare water to any other liquid, it's completely unique. It's right out on the extremes, on practically every possible metric. Yeah, well, I won't weirder. What do you mean you won't weirder? All right, let me have a go. There's this concept which I remember from A-level chemistry, but haven't said this word for 25 years. It's amphoteric, right? Tell us what amphoteric is. Lovely word. What it basically means is that water can act both as an acidic substance and as a base, bit like an alkali, really. So within a glass of water, there's a very, very small fraction of those water molecules that have fallen apart into hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions. So into basically the stuff that makes up acids and the stuff that makes up bases. And all of this strangeness is of fundamental importance because water acts as a solvent, which means that it is absolutely essential for life on Earth. Yes, that's right. And then water is a very good solvent for many things. It's not for everything, you know, that's why we have to use detergents, right? Because it doesn't dissolve fatty and oily substances, but it dissolves minerals in particular. That's what I said. Yes, but you didn't say amphoteric. Oh, and if there's one thing that makes things weird, it's words that you barely understand, is it? Amphoteric. That's exactly the point. One of the reasons why water is so interesting for life is because it has these strange properties which allows it to dissolve salts in it and salts turn into ions when they're dissolved in water. And that allows information electricity to pass in and out of cells. But this other characteristic that it has, which is not a universal solvent because fats don't dissolve in it. So we have cell membranes, which are fatty, which don't dissolve in water, otherwise we just dissolve all the time, which means that you can have the inside and the outside of cells, and it means that ions can flow in and out of cells. And that's basically how biology works. So water is the perfect vessel for life in a way? Yes, it's absolutely essential for all life as we know it. All right, let's ask Trisha. What it is about water that makes it so weird? Water has something called a hydrogen bond, which is at the root of many of these unusual properties. Okay, it's the hydrogen bonds that make it weird. So you've got one oxygen atom in the middle, two hydrogen atoms out on the side. Now the oxygen is a little bit greedy. So it ends up grabbing on a little bit more to its fair share of electrons, which leaves those hydrogen atoms positively charged, sticking out like two prongs, like a pair of legs if you like positively charged legs. Meanwhile, that oxygen atom is negatively charged. It's got this whole area of negatively charged electron density sitting behind it. Little bits like two bunnies, negatively charged bunnies. I feel like you may be anthropomorphizing this a little bit, but keep going. Go in, go in. So when you get lots of water molecules together, you've got positively charged legs, negatively charged ears, the legs and ears start sticking together. That's how these hydrogen bonds move around, stretch and relax, so that gives water many of its unusual properties. And these hydrogen bonds aren't fixed. And that's the other very interesting thing. They flick on and off at a very rapid timescale, a bit like a strobe light flicking on and off on and off on and off. And so these hydrogen bonds are sort of flicking around the liquid system all the time. I remember doing bonds at school, but this was sort of the era when you would have polystyrene balls and then straws and you would sort of stick one to the other. Is that a sort of a fair or an accurate depiction of these bonds that I should have in my mind? Or I've also heard it's described as it's a bit more like Taz of Tasmania. Is that a better analogy? Actually, I think they're both high light different aspects. So our strong covalent bond with the oxygen hydrogen is a bit more like your straw. But when we think about what the electrons are doing, they don't actually like to stay stuck in one bond. They're moving around. These are quantum particles. We have a probability. And so they're actually moving all around the water molecule. So you've got one H2O molecule bonding with four others. I've heard it described as though it forms like a pyramid shape. Yes. So you could imagine the oxygen in the middle of a pyramid. And you could imagine the two covalent bonds to the hydrogen sort of pointing at different corners of the tetrahedron. And then the two lone peers pointing at the opposite corners of the tetrahedron. So a pyramid with a triangle base, essentially? Yeah. And then is that what's happening then when water is in a liquid state? You've got these rigid structures in the center and then these tetrahedrons that are sort of attached to one another almost like by bungee cords. Is that how to imagine it? You could think about as a weak bungee cord with the oxygen sitting in the middle. So what you're saying is that basically even in liquid water, there's this sort of weird pyramid structure within the H2O molecules that are sticking it together? Yeah, exactly. So even in liquid water, even at room temperature, normal pressure, if you zoomed in enough on your glass of water, you would see these tiny little pyramids that were linked by bungee cords to other water molecules. But they're flicking on and off, they're jiggling around, they're stretching and pushing and moving around. And that is what is really unique here. Other liquids just don't have that kind of internal structure. Right. I mean, this sounds really important and I think we should let it sink in for a bit. You please be yourself, I mean. Yeah, very, very. So Chesha is a quantum physicist, right? This is a very 21st century understanding of wet. Okay. What did the engines think then before we knew about quantum physics? Right. Well, in many cultures, water was considered one of the four basic elements. So you've got earth, wind, fire, boogie wonderland and water. That was fine. Yeah. Phil Ball explained to me why they thought water was such a fundamental element. It kind of stems to reason, really, because it seems to be one of the most fundamental substances in the world. And there was this idea from the ancient Greek philosophy of Thales in the fifth century BC. He said basically water is the fundamental stuff. Everything is made out of water. It's the most fundamental element. By an element, they mean it couldn't be reduced to anything else. You can't split it apart into other substances. That idea stuck around right up until the 18th century. And it was in the late 18th century that people started to doubt that water was actually an element. And the reason for that, it was really ascribed to an English scientist called Henry Cavendish, who was a very odd character, a completely reclusive. Cavendish was looking at a gas that could be made by sticking metals into acids. People have known for some time that the bubbles that formed on the surface of the metal were flammable. So if you ignited it ignites with a pop. And it's the gas that we now call hydrogen. But in those days, people didn't think of it in those terms. And Cavendish, like most people, believed in a theory called flogiston, or a substance called flogiston, which was meant to be a kind of element that made things burn. The idea was that when things burned, they gave off flogiston. Things that burned did so because they were rich in flogiston. Anyway, Cavendish burnt this stuff in air, but he did it in a sealed container. And he found that when you did that, it went pop and it burned. And then you got water forming on the surfaces of the glass vessel. So he started to think maybe we're making water in this process. Yeah, we love a bit of flogiston on curious cases, because it's one of those... Well, we now know it's made up. It was an invented thing to explain how things actually work. So what does he think is happening when this gas becomes flogiscated? What is even the verb for that? Flogiscated. Yes. So, yeah, yeah. So he figured that this flogiston was combining with some component in the air. He found that when it burnt, only one-fifth of the air seemed to be used up in this reaction, the rest stayed. Anyway, he figured that this flogiston was combining with this bit of the air and that it was producing water. So, you know, that was the way he saw it, that flogiston, plus a bit of the air that he called de-flogisticated air. Because it didn't have flogiston. So the two were combining to make water. Now, it is literally that was what was happening, except that we now replace flogiston with hydrogen and de-flogisticated air with oxygen. And in fact, hydrogen, the name means waterformer. That was the name given to it by Frank Chichemist Antoine Lavazier, who made sense of all of this. So it was Lavazier who decided, no, it's not de-flogisticated air, it's oxygen. And this substance called hydrogen, and they combine to make water. Lavazier, he's the guy that met his end by guillotine, is he? Yes, that's right. Do you know why? What, why he got guillotine? Yeah. Tax fraud, something? That's part of it. Yes, there were nine charges against him in the French Revolution, one of which was tax fraud. But another was to do with adulterating tobacco. So tobacco, you sell it by weight, and some of the tobacco manufacturers would increase the weight by adding what substance to it. Water? Yes, exactly. Adding water to it. Now, Lavazier got involved in this and decided that some people shouldn't do it under certain regulations, but he settled on 6.3% of water in a little bit of ash. And blah, blah, blah, French Revolution, they decided it wasn't very cool, so they lobbed his head off. But none of the reasons why he got his head cut off, where anything to do with is absolutely excellent chemistry to do with water. Well, thanks for your cool story. All right, where are we? Water is weird. It's got lots of strange physical properties that you don't find in other liquids. And part of that is down to its physical structure. Yes, and something, something, something deflegisticated and amphoteric. Yes, thank you for that insight, Dr. Rutherford. But Lavazier and his experiments into the weirdness of water are really the beginning of our changing understanding of chemistry. And water's weirdness is a rise because of its unusual atomic structure. Surface tension is energy per unit area. And so if we think about a water molecule and what we say is bulk water or in liquid water, it's happy and it's nice and a relatively low energy state. Now, if you imagine a glass of water, you're going to have water halfway up. And then at some point, there's going to be air. And we're going to hit an interface. And those water molecules on the interface, will they can form all 400 gym bonds? Two or more of them will be missing because there's just air above it. And so these waters aren't as happy. They're not as stable. They're higher energy. And so what the water wants to do is to reduce the number of high energy water molecules. And the best way it can do that is by creating a sphere that is the structure or the shape with the lowest surface area. Ah, that's very interesting. Is the surface tension of water unusual compared to other liquids? Is it a higher surface tension than you see elsewhere? Yes, it is. It's got a very high surface tension compared to most other liquids. And it's all because of those high to gym bonds? Yep, all because of the hydrogen bonds. Adam, you know those insects that skate on the surface of ponds? Yes, we call them pond skaters. What about them? They're using surface tension, aren't they? They are, but not just that. They also have water resistant fatty pads on the bottom of their feet, which help them when they're water repellent. So that's part of how they float. Okay, okay. What's the heaviest animal that can walk on water there? Well, what an interesting question. And off the top of my head, there is the, well, there's the basilisk lizard, which runs along. It's not using surface tension, but it's sort of slapping action of his feet. Creates a little tiny pocket of air. You're doing that face. I mean, when I start talking about biology. I'm just impressed about how easily you can turn anything into a lecture. But anyway, you're wrong because the actual answer is ever since. I'm sorry, what? Well, they can walk on water if it's frozen as ice. Yes, I see what you did there. You tricked me, a little trickster. This is leading somewhere, is it? It is, it is. Because one of the weirdest things about water is its solid form. Ice is less dense than its liquid form. Ice floats. And again, is down to those crazy hydrogen interactions. When you cool water down, it wants to release the energy from the hydrogen bonds. The hydrogen bonds sort of become more restricted, because they're not sort of flickering as fast. And they become more structured sort of hexagons. So they like to form a six-membered ring. And that means that all the waters in the six-membered ring can hydrogen bond to each other and you typically have sort of three hydrogen bonds pointing up. And then you'll have another layer of water molecule about that. And they'll be receiving the hydrogen bonds from the layer below. And then what happens is we've got lots of space. We've got space down the center of our hexagons. And we've got space between these sheets that are forming. And so what we have actually is an expanded structure relative to the liquid water. And that's one of the really unusual things that water does. It expands when it cools down. Because most systems, when you take the energy out, when they get colder, they all contract down because there's fewer vibrations. But water does the opposite. Hey Hannah, you know how they say that the inuets have more than 30 words for snow. Let me guess. Not true. Not true at all. They do have multiple words for snow for various language groups around the Arctic Circle, Northern Canada and Alaska. But it's actually not that many more than we have in English. Why are you telling me this? You know who does have more than 15 words for ice. Scientists. I lose count actually. I believe at the moment there are 15 known crystalline forms of ice. So basically that's ice, but just with the water molecules inside them, joined together in different microscopic structures. I mean, the different names are basically just listing the word ice with numbers after them. What like ice one, ice two, ice three? Yeah, yeah. But the point is that we do have different types of ice. When you change the pressure, when you squeeze those water molecules together, you do get different types of ice. You know within ice one, within the normal form of ice, there's all this empty space. And that's why it's less dense. What happens when you squeeze ice is that the water molecules kind of realize that actually, we're getting squeezed, but there's all this empty space we can move into. And so they will reform into a different crystal structure, where some of that space is occupied. And in fact, in some of the densest forms of ice, what you get is basically something like the normal ice structure, but twice, too interlinked, interpenetrating networks. So they're separate networks of normal ice, sort of interpenetrating so that one of them fills all the spaces and threads through the spaces of the other. So that means it can get much more dense without any of the water molecules sacrificing their hydrogen bonding. Okay, I think maybe we all need a bit of a break from all of this. Quite difficult chemistry and physics. So which I can have demonstration? Always. Hannah is tipping some ice cubes into a glass. What have you? Is a glass with ice in it? There you go. Well, thank you. And some thread. Now what are we going to do without touching the ice at all with your fingers? Use the thread to get an ice cube out of the glass. Well, you want to fish for ice in a glass with thread? Yeah, I want you to lift the ice out using thread. Is that possible? Do you want to clear? Yes. Dangling the thread in the glass is probably not going to get you anywhere. But there is something else that you can use. Oh, you've got a cup of salt, is that? Yes, it does some salt. You can use this to help you to get the ice cube out. Honestly, I've got no idea what's going on. Do you want me to show you how to do it? Yes, please. There's the ice, there's the thread. Okay, so what you do is sprinkle a bit of salt on top of the ice like that. Oh, that's lovely, isn't it? It's not making a cocktail. And then just going to pop that in there. Give me a minute. So what have you done? You put salt on the ice and then you put a bit of thread on the ice. Through the salty bit of the ice. Oh, yes. Now, what's happening here is that salt lowers the freezing point of water to below zero degrees C. So the salt is in a very thin layer, so it's going to melt a very thin layer on top of the ice. The water is going to cool down further on re-freeze around the string, so that you can. Oh, look at that. Oh, look! That is quite clever, actually. You know, in these sorts of demos, I'm always like, super cynical, is this going to work? And then when it actually does work, that's quite cool. So Hannah has actually picked up an ice cube with a piece of string by putting some salt on it. And now we're going to have margaritas. But that is cool. That property of salt lowering the melting point of ice, that's why we put salt on roads, right? Yeah, exactly. Because if you add something that lowers the freezing point, then when the temperature is bumping along around zero, it means that the water is not going to freeze, right? It's going to stay liquid for much longer. Now, I'm not going to get into the stickiness and the slipperyness of water because actually we're going to save that for a whole lot of the programs, because it's very lovely. Okay, totally looking forward to that. But did you know that water does a really weird thing as it cools down before it becomes ice? No, but you're about to tell me. Yeah, Phil Ball is. Because ice is less dense than liquid water, it floats at the top. And then water also does this weird thing. But for most substances, when you heat them up, they expand. Because the molecules are jiggling faster, they sort of stay a bit further away from each other. You know, that's why when mercury gets warm, it expands and goes up the tube in the thermometer. Water does that too, except when it gets down to four degrees. So four degrees above freezing, suddenly, if you cool it down, it stops shrinking and it starts growing. It starts expanding. So water is actually densest at four degrees centigrade, rather than when it's coldest. Okay, in this event, cold water sinks to the bottom, warm water floats. It gets colder the deeper you go, until it gets to four degrees and then it starts to float up again, as it tends to ice. No, not really, because there's the effect of the pressure on the water, on the deeper water, and water has heat capacity. And I am well beyond my understanding of this subject. In situations like this, I call upon oceanographer, Arctic physicist and paddleboard enthusiast, Helen Chersky. Why? Well, the first thing is that the ocean is very different to a lake. So adding salt to water changes its behaviour. It makes something that's weird, slightly less weird, actually, in some ways. Lakes and the ocean always cool from the surface. So that's where it's getting cold first. And what happens in the lake is that the cooler water that has just been cooled at the surface is more dense than the warmer water underneath it. So it will sink down and it will fill up the bottom of the lake and the warmer water will come to the top until it gets to four degrees C. And when it gets there, that process of overturning so cooler water sinking to the bottom, that stops because all the water is at the same temperature. It's all at four degrees C. It's all as dense as it can get. And then what happens next is that any water that cools any further at the surface then gets a tiny, tiny bit less dense and it's only a tiny bit, but it's enough to keep it at the surface and then it can sink down to zero degrees and freeze. And so there's this weird situation where the whole lake, if it's completely still, will cool down until it's four degrees C. And then it will cool again from the surface and the top layers are less dense just by a little bit and they can stay at the surface and freeze. Now in the ocean, it's very different because in the ocean, it is not always true that warmer water lies on top of cold water. And the reason for that is that the temperature isn't the only thing that affects the density. Less dense water sits on top of more dense water and the other thing that can affect density is salinity. And of course, there's lots of salt in the ocean and it changes that behavior of water. So for fresh water, it reaches its maximum density at about four degrees C. But in salt water, it just gets more and more dense all the way down to zero. And in fact, a little bit further than that because when you add salt to water, the freezing temperature goes down a little bit and depending on how salty it is, it's around minus two degrees C, a little bit less than that. In the ocean, it just keeps getting more and more dense as it gets colder and colder. Well, why does the ocean freeze at all then? Because surely in that case, cold water at the surface is going down more, it's coming up and then that will become more dense and sink down too. And then you'll never get any properly cold water at the surface until whole ocean is ready to freeze. Yeah, well, we are talking about the Arctic Ocean and the Arctic is frozen, which that's where the North Pole is. My understanding of this is because water is weird. Well, that doesn't happen because the ocean has layers. So this is the critical point about the Arctic Ocean. It's a bit of a weird ocean. Told you, at the surface, there's a layer that might be perhaps a hundred meters deep and that layer has a little bit less salt than the layer beneath it. So even though the temperature of that top layer can go down all the way to minus two, it's still less dense than the saltier water underneath it. And so that whole layer will go down to about minus two degrees and it will mix up until it's all at minus two. And then it's not going anywhere else to go. You've got a layer of water that's all the same density. If you take any more heat out of it, the surface will start to freeze. So it is true in both lakes and the ocean that they freeze from the top, but it actually happens for slightly different reasons. So, Dr. Fry, as for the weirdness of water, can we say case salt? Oh, we haven't even got started Dr. Rampers, which is why we're coming back next week to finish the job. Correct. And so far, we have discovered why ice is less dense than water because of hydrogen bonds. Why water is most dense at four degrees and not zero? That's also hydrogen bonds. Why water has a strong surface area? I know that one, hydrogen bonds. And why there are at least 15 different forms of ice. Is it hydrogen bonds? Do you know what a hydrogen bond is? Not really. Next week, we're going to find out just why water is so essential for life on Earth and maybe on other planets too. Spoiler alert, it's hydrogen bonds! Okay, so that's the end of part one. Of the weirdness of water. I do actually know what hydrogen bond is. I think I do. Do you know what happened to my level chemistry? There were three papers, two organic one in organic. And I got two Ds in the organic papers. For real? For real. And then for the inorganic paper, which is, if I remember rightly, much more mathsy, I got something absolutely insane, like 92%, which brought me up to one mark above an A. And I dropped it for a S level. Thank you very much. That's very good. Well, I mean, it's sort of good. I don't know. I think the point is I don't know very much about hydrogen bonds beyond water pressure was telling me. Well, I mean, it's one of those sort of concepts that I think, you know, proper chemists and physical chemists do know. It's really essential for genetics because it's what holds the two strands of the double helix together. So all these letters of genetic code, they're actually held together with hydrogen bonds. Yeah. It's interesting. Yeah, they're strong enough to hold it together, but they're weak enough to pull it apart so that when you're going through cell division and replication and stuff like that. Hey, that's pretty cool. Yeah. Okay, I might not know that much, but hydrogen bonds beyond what Trisha told me. But I do know actually quite a bit about ice because part of my PhD was about when an aircraft goes up into the sky. If you have super-cooled water as it hits the wing of an aircraft. Wait, what's super-cooled water? Just that really cold. Okay, but it hasn't got a nucleation point within it. So it hasn't yet turned to ice. Yeah. But all it needs is to impact something or instantly turn to ice essentially. So this can happen on the wing of an aircraft. It's called rhyme ice, the type of ice that forms. And it can actually be a really serious problem because if you travel through enough frozen droplets in the sky, it can affect the aerodynamic structure of the wing and end up causing so much drag that it can actually take a plane. Not now, don't worry, everybody who's skilifying, but has historically been able to take planes out of the sky. So there's all these kind of things that they can do. They can put these boots on the front on the leading edge of the aircraft wing that when you're up, if you think you get too much ice on your wings, you can inflate them like a little, you're sort of like pump air into them. Just cracks it off. Cracks it all off. Yeah. Do wings have them these days? No, so commercial aircraft, if I understand this rightly, and I'm sure there are people listening to this, who know this particular area much more than me, but commercial aircraft are built so their wings are much greater, provide much more lift than they need to sort of stay up. So they've actually got a lot of leeway really. They're not sort of, you know, teetering on the brink in terms of the amount of lift that they capable of. And that was you modeled that in your PhD? Yeah, although one thing to say about mathematical modeling PhDs, you know, applied mathematics is like, yeah, sure, right at the beginning of the PhD, we were like, look at this case study that we're so interested in. By the end of four years, I had a two-dimensional model that didn't have any surface-dimensional gravity in it and couldn't deal with ice. Whilst planes were tumbling out of the sky day after day, thanks academic modeling in mass. Right, what else about ice? You know how you're very weird about food, like pizza, non-breads and like, bracing spaghetti. That's not weird, that's like normal. Have we also ever mentioned the fact that Adam won't consume any ice that was made in a residential freezer? It's got a very weird thing about it. It's not weird, it's also not quite as strict as that. I just don't... Ice tea making ice trays has bits in it. It's got peas in it, it's got the bread crumbs from fish fingers in it. It's impossible to make ice in a fridge without those things happening. And I do not want that in my genitonic. It is an indulgence, I admit, but I stick quite. You know that ice cube trays come with lids? I did not know that and I regret this whole conversation being made in public. There's loads more of this, by the way. Go to Anne Frond of the kitchen and it's just like an entire cathedral of Twitter content. You're not welcome in my kitchen, Curios. We have our scripts that we have on computers in front of us, which means that me and Hannah and also our producer Fee can type because she's at home because of, you know, the bad bugs. 2021. And she's typed in floggeston, which I didn't know the origin of that of stupid word. She's put in mid 18th century modern Latin from the Greek flogesign, which means to set on fire from flocks, flog meaning flame and flinging to burn. And at this point, just saying was it sound like fling. I think that's your catch on. I think when you're like, I think you should be able to say like, you're looking well flinging. We've got joint winners for Curio the Week this week. We're returning to an old theme on Curio of the Week this week. Anybody who has listened to God knows what series it was in. Something like somewhere between series eight and series 15. We'll know about Adam and I's. Pong Sean for an interrebang. Yes. Yes, we love an interrebang. We had one Curio of the Week earlier who claimed to have put in an interrebang within their PhD thesis or intended to. We never saw evidence of it and thus did not give out a Curio of the Week badge. However, jumping on the interrebang bandwagon, we have two Curios, Matt Monroe and also Tom Williams, who both claim to have put in an interrebang in the distations. And you know what, Tom's distation was history BA on Charlemagne, just saying, you know, and he says that he has an honest to goodness interrebang smuggled it about halfway through and he adds, I hate to beg, but please can I have a Curio of the Week? I mean, yeah, I mean, it works. It does. And he did provide photographic evidence. The other comes from one of our Kiwi listeners. We know we got a lot of New Zealanders who are Curios and this one from Matt's, Matt Monroe. Matt is at Victoria University which is in Wellington, which is also where Trisha Hunt, our quantum physicist, talking about water on that episode was, but Matt says, I snuck an interrebang into a figure legend in his PhD defense despite in bracket, sadly, finding other grammatical errors that slipped through the cracks. But this one was intentional. Yeah, I think that's a double. I think it's a double, yeah, exactly. Matt and Tom both get interrebanged. Well done to Curios this week. You more Curio of the Weeks next week in the meantime, if you have any questions that you would like us to investigate, as always, please send in your emails, your letters, your entries for Curio of the Week, things that you've made, things that you've drawn, things that you've musically constructed to amuse and delight us, send them all in to CuriosCases at bbc.co.uk. And more water next week. This is Add to Playlist, a new podcast from BBC Radio 4 with me, Keras Matthews and me, Jeffrey Boachi. Ditch the stream in algorithm as we take you on a musical journey of discovery. In each show, we'll create a playlist of five tracks chosen by Keras and myself, and with the help of a difference due to a guest each week, we'll explore the rich and unexpected web of connections between the music you love, hate and haven't even heard of. That's a promise. We'll go under the bonnet of our compositions and look closer at the Natsun Boats to reveal what's behind our favourite tunes. Just search for Add to Playlist on BBC Sounds.
