Welcome back to the Curious Cases of Rutherford and Fry. Hello! We've got five whole brand new episodes, especially for you. Yes, where you send in your curious questions. To CuriousCases.bbs.uk. And we go off and we try and figure out what the hell is going on. I can't say that kind of. Indeed, using our special science detective skills. Yes, and today's episode is about the correct way to pour and make a cup of tea, which is very important to us Brits. Absolutely. This episode also comes with a bit of a warning, because it does contain some slurping noises, which some listeners may find disturbing. Yes, I found them disturbing. They were both shocking and revolting, but nevertheless, apparently, that's how tea taste is actually tasty. It was like... ...which is a bit like Hannibal Lecter. A little bit like Hannibal Lecter. I wanted to put that in the scripts, but Michelle, our producer, say hello, Michelle. Hello. She said we couldn't refer to our guests as being like Hannibal Lecter. No, it's generally best avoided comparing your guests to Sarah Killock. One thing I should say, actually, is stick around to the end of this podcast, because at the end we have a very special interview with someone you may recognise from last series. Yes, it's really, really exciting. So at the end of this podcast, listen, and now it's time for tea. Cuppeteed, Dr. Frye. Yes, please. And how do you take this? Milk and sugar, please. Yes, sugar in your tea. I do have sugar in my tea. You're like a child. I strongly disagree with that. Do you want some milk in yours? No, no, no, no, I don't have milk in mine. I like lights. It's not a proper cup of tea. Light, brown, water. Well, you know what? I think that all you should set all these questions once and for all, because we have been sent the following question from Frederick Abbey, who lives in Monroe, North Carolina. When we are preparing a cup of tea and the cup contains nothing but hot, brewed tea, as I have mine. We need to add milk and sugar. My wife always adds the sugar first, stirs the cup to make sure it's dissolved and then adds the milk. So, is that an optimum strategy for adding milk and sugar to a cup of tea? Kind regards, Fred. Do you get the impression that Fred and his wife might not see eye to eye on how to make a cup of tea? Well, Fred, unfortunately, we don't offer spousal advice on this programme. No, but we can investigate the scientific method for a perfect cup of tea. But first, I think we need to go back to the beginning. Once upon a time in ancient China, the legendary Emperor Shen'an was wandering the lands, and he has boiled some water to make it safe to drink, so the story goes, the breeze carries some leaves from the plant Chameleon synensis in his culture. OK, that is enough legendary Chinese legend, please. That was the invention of tea. That was the invention of tea. Hasn't been fact-checked, I think it might just be a legend. It's a good legend, so. He's quite a good legend. The thing I like about this legend is that then Emperor Shen'an, having discovered tea, went on to test thousands of other medicinal herbs until he finally came across one that made his intestines explode. That's true at all. It's brilliant, though. Let's just assume it's true. Yeah, and ever since then, everyone has weighed in with their opinion on how to make the perfect cup of tea. The Royal Society of Chemistry have looked at it, and the British Science Association. Also, the Institute of Physics, the British Standards Institution... And now it's our turn. All right. Shall we start with the nicest China and the best tea? No, sir. Our investigation begins with what comes out of your spout. Of course, the most important thing is actually the water. We'd sort of ignore it, but when you think about tea, that's the elephant in the rum. This is Andrea Sella, professor of Chemistry at University College London. 97% of your cup of tea is actually the water itself, and it's that which you use to extract the flavor components from the tea leaves. And then it's the medium, which is actually going to deliver these onto all of the sort of sensory parts of your mouth and nose. Okay, so let's talk about the water. Water is water, H2O. How much variability is there in changing what a cup of tea tastes like? Well, you will have differing amounts of dissolve to magnesium and calcium, in other words, whether it's harder soft. And that actually makes a big difference because many of the molecules that are associated with the flavor and the color of tea will actually react with magnesium and calcium, and they will start to stick together and precipitate. It's that which generates the scum on the surface of the tea, which doesn't look very good, and stains your tea cup. If we don't want scummy tea, and I don't think anyone wants scummy tea, what do we need to do with the water? First of all, using softer water, I think the other thing is not to use absolutely boiling water. Tea experts will often argue about which particular temperature you need for different types of tea, but typically you don't want to take it directly from the kettle. You actually want to wait a moment for it to cool down. It's actually going to slow down the speed at which things are extracted, and that will help to reduce the scum that you get. Right, so that's your chemistry on tea, but I went to go and visit somebody who has spent their entire life sampling and perfecting the ideal brew. This is Master Tea Taster, Alex Probin, at his secret laboratory in Kent. If you thought the making tea was simple, think again. Okay, so the kettle is just boiled now. What I'm going to be using here is professional tea taste is cocky, so I'm going to be pouring the water into what look like small mugs. You see the serrated teeth edge at the front there. When I tip the mug into the bowl here, it will then strain the tea leaves through. The tea leaves will remain in the mug, but the liquid or the liquor has its own brew out. I noticed you've got your little stopwatch out to make this very precise. Yes, so three grams of tea, three minutes in 200 ml of water. I think three minutes seems like quite a long time to brew a sort of normal tea bag. Some people like to just wharf their tea bag a little bit and take it out. That's me. You'll be getting a bit of the caffeine coming through, but not so much the antioxidants. I need to pour these out now. I'm so sorry. I'm so sorry. The mug's into the bowls. So as a tasteer, I'll be looking at the dry leaf, and that'll tell me something about the quality of the tea. I'll then look at the wet leaf, what's left in the cup, and then finally I'll be looking at the liquor and what tea is in the bowl here. And there is a surprising amount of overlap between the way that you're tasting tea here and the way that people might taste wine. I mean, can you describe the notes that you find in different teas? Yeah, very much so. So tea tasteers would have a similar style of language, whether it's a floral flavour or a multi-flavour or different styles there too. So people understand that a wine from one part of the world will taste very different to wine from another part of the world. The same thing happens in tea. And also you get good years in wine and bad years in wine, you get the same thing in tea. Thinking, the rather for teas the new wine? Yes, well, I suppose that the main difference between tea and wine is that there are many different varieties and species of grape, but tea all comes from the same species, which is chameleous and ences. I think probably the main difference is that one's alcoholic. That is also a difference. Working on what you've said. If it just all comes from one species, how come the different teas like d'agilin, lap sang su shung, how come they all taste so different? Well, that, my friend, is down to chemistry. The first thing is that we have these things called flavonols, and these are complex molecules which typically have, at one end or both ends, benzene rings which have OHs on them. These are often molecules that taste quite bitter, and therefore the part of the defense mechanisms that the plant has, A, against the environment, and B, against predators. The second great class are the terpenes, a huge class of flavor molecules that include things like limine and geraniol and so on, which we typically associate with quite strong vegetable smells. These again are things which are quite effective in keeping insects at bay, and we've just learnt to kind of like some of these. The final thing are actually alkalides, and those are things like theophiline or caffeine, which often, in fact, are stimulants. The other thing which is crucial is what happens after the tea is picked and it is dried and fermented. Of course, that process, which is aided by bacteria, actually generates further molecules. You've really got a very complex library, and in a way a bit like wine, what you've got are an element of terroir, depending on its provenance, you get something different. Essentially, what we're tasting into is natural insecticides. Yes, all plants have natural insecticides to keep the insects away, but they are just chemicals, and that's where the flavor comes from. How do you taste tea properly? By drinking it? Wow, you think so, wouldn't you? And liver, this is how to taste tea like a professional, and I'll warn you, this is quite something to behold. In terms of tasting tea, there is a very specific way of doing it. Tea tastes are not quite so posh as wine tastes in the way that we do it, and we like to make a bit of noise. So I need to hand you a spoon, you dunk the spoon in, and you have a bit of a slurp. Gosh, you do make some noise. What a bit of noise there, and of course you're perfectly entitled to spit it out, so you've got a spittin here if you want to. I'm not so comfortable about the spittin. I think I'm probably just going to drink the tea, and I'm going to try and do as aggressive as slurp as I can. That was pathetic. That was quite delicate, but that was quite delicate. Hang on, hang on, let me have another go. That's better. Better. I'm getting there, I'm getting there. By doing that, you're spraying it all over your tongue, so you're getting it all over your different taste buds at the same time, you're forcing those aromas and flavours up into your factory senses, which actually plays a bigger part in taste, in my opinion, than anything else. That is ridiculous. What? The noise. You don't need to make that noise. Apparently you do. But anyway, I think we're neglecting the most important question here, which is the one from Mr. Riccabee. Yes, when do you add the milk and the sugar? And is Mrs. Riccabee right or wrong? Well, I check with our chemist Andrea Sella. Look, first, there's no question that the sugar will dissolve more quickly in the hot water. But even with cold tea, you have to add so much sugar that your spoon will stand up in the resulting liquid before you can't dissolve anymore. I mean, sugar is phenomenally soluble. So milk, then. Now, milk is an old substance in itself. How do we actually classify milk in terms of its liquid status? It's an emulsion, right? It's a suspension of tiny little droplets of protein and fat in a watery matrix. If you raise the temperature of milk, then all kinds of things happen. Particularly, the proteins will start to unfold. In the moment they start to unfold, then they begin to stick to each other. And at the same time, the fat is now released. And so what you get is that kind of cooking process, which begins to happen. And so what you need to do is not add the milk while the tea is very, very hot. So you think that actually the moment of adding milk is going to be crucial in making the perfect cup of tea. This sounds like with all the variables that when the milk goes in is going to be the, maybe the deciding factor. Well, let me be brutally honest. I think that if you put me to the test and you handed me two cups of tea at identical temperatures, one that had been with the milk added first and one with the milk added second, I probably wouldn't be able to tell you the difference. But I'll give you plenty of reasons why you might want to do it in one way or the other. And what that does is it gives us an experiment that we can try. Well we do love an experiment. And what better guinea pig than Master T taste to himself, Alex Provin? Could his train taste buds tell the difference between two teas I prepared in secret while he was outside his office? Right. What I've done. I've brewed two different mugs of tea. The first cup, I put the milk in the mug first and the other, I put the milk in after the tea had brewed. Okay, let's get Alex back in and see if he can tell the difference. Alex, I've brewed you two cups of tea. Do your worst. Right. So I have a bit of a slurp. Let's go back in for a second go. Okay. They're the same tea. Correct. Just by looking at them there, I would say that one of them has been brewed with a slightly different quality of water. Interesting. I'm getting a more multi sort of character on this one, but this one here tastes a bit smoother a bit cleaner. So I believe that that's possibly that it's with soft water. Wrong. Did he fad, though? His second guess was the milk and he did get them the right way around. But it does go to show that Fred, I'm afraid to say it probably doesn't matter. So Dr. Rutherford, to case soul? Yes. Sugar can go in at any time though why you would is totally beyond me. But the milk cooks if it gets too hot, so add that last once the water is cooled down. And that's if you're using a mug, if you're brewing a pot, then feel free to add the milk first. Or doing reality, you can't really tell the difference. So do what you like best. Okay, so there it is. Make tea the way you want it. Doing what you want is generally quite good advice for life, I think. That is true, although there clearly is the best British way to make tea as well. And it's not that we're judging you if you do it differently, it's just that you're wrong. That's the best way. Yes. Anyway, we've got a special treat for you now. We should also say thank you, though, to BBC Future. And if you'd like to find more video articles, all sorts of other stuff about the series and the last series, go to bbc.com slash future. And of course, very special. Thank you to our excellent producer Michelle. Say hello, Michelle. There she is. But now we've got a really, really special treat now. Some of you. Even more special than our special treat. She's very special. But look, like, like, last series, you may remember the case of the phantom jam in which Hannah sent me off to the M25 and I had about five o'clock in the morning and I had to drive very slowly in order for us to work out the mathematics of why traffic jams occur. And in that episode, we featured a clip from a very futuristic video explaining what the world would be like in Mazda City with loads of driverless cars. There is nowhere else in the world like Mazda City. It is completely unique. This is viewed by many as one of the world's most exciting developments. Now the narration on that video, we were so impressed with that. That honey toned this incredible rich voice over that we started referring to as Mazda City man. Anyway, a few days later, we got an email to the curious cases email address, which is curiouscases at bbc.co.uk. And it said this. I'm slightly low to read this because it should be. Not like we're in the right place. Hello, rather, for them, fry. Well, the nice words we used on your wireless program about me today. I thank you. Cheers. Greg Mauston. Yes, Greg Mauston is Mazda City man and he contacted us. And we called him. Yes, we did. Hello. Hello, Greg. It's Adam Rutherford. Hello, Greg. How are you doing? We wondered if this was your real voice. Hello. Hello, Greg. Hello, Greg. Hello, Greg. How are you doing? We wondered if this was your real voice and it seems that it is. Well, obviously, it's a little bit modified depending on what it is that I actually have to read at the time. But generally speaking, thanks to my parents, I think mostly I grew up talking this way and have done for the last X years. What are your tips, Greg, for keeping your voice so honeyed? Honey soft. Alcohol. Really? Yeah, really. Look, if you speak to anyone particularly to do with how you should treat and use your voice if you're using your voice for a living, they will mostly all say don't drink milk, don't eat chocolate. And I just must be very lucky because it doesn't matter what I do. I don't smoke it to them. But I used to have a previous life like about 30 years ago. It just is what it is. And I'm really lucky. And I think that's to do with when you're born, you have a certain set of vocal chords and your muscles are all in various places and conditions and so forth. But no, I really don't have anything that I do specifically to keep my voice the way that it is. You know when people have really distinctive voices and you can't help but imagine what they look like just based on their voice. Tell us that you're not some really sort of teeny, I don't know, I try to do a much of what's the most extraordinary thing that you could look like. Now, well, the most extraordinary thing that people usually, if you remember back to the 60s, the cartoon character Mr. McGoo. I don't believe it for a second. No, no, that's what they think that people like me and like us voiceovers in very good life. But no, I'm six foot, reasonably slim, have my hair or most of it. And just sort of look, I don't know, when I was younger, apparently, apparently I used to look like John Cavolta. Now that I'm older, it's more like Bob Gildorf is I don't actually do it with my hair. Well, you're a complete fan favorites on the curious cases that that Mazda Citi advert that we used in season one was just a complete win for us. We adore your voice. So we'd like you to say for the end of the podcast, if you've got any scientific queries that Dr. Fry and Rutherford can help you with, then please email. Curious cases at BBC.co.uk. Blimey, I'm going to have to write there. I mean, you can riff it. You can make it up. Make it up as you go along. Rutherford and Fry. I'm Rutherford, she's fry. Okay, so I'll start off with something like this. Ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls, people of the earth, if you have any scientific queries, curious questions or ridiculous things you would like to ask, messes Rutherford and Fry, they will endeavor to answer your questions and do so with stunning alacrity. All you have to do is email them on curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. That's curious cases at BBC.co.uk. Thank you for listening. I'm here all week. Try the video.
