I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. Science. I like it. MUSIC Hello, Cureos. This is the second part of water containing lots more of your questions about the weird watery world. MUSIC Important. The water, the world of water. I just feel like I've used up all of my water words. We have spent the script a lot of time talking about water. And we're going to talk more about hydrogen bonds in this one. Here we go. Oh, yeah. MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC Today, the second part of our Cureos cases quest to uncover the unending weirdness of one of the weirdest substances on earth. Yes, it's completely unusual, incredibly strange, and yet also completely ubiquitous. And absolutely essential for life to exist. MUSIC We are, of course, talking about water. Last week we dove into its peculiar physical properties and its strange molecular structure. Do you have a quick recap? Right, as far as I recall, it was all down to hydrogen bonds, wasn't it? You know what it was. Because water is not like other liquids. It is most dense at four degrees, which means that it's solid form, ice, of course, floats to the top. That's very unusual. Plus, it has this incredibly strong surface tension. Yeah, like I said, hydrogen bonds, it's hydrogen bonds all the way down. You don't know what hydrogen bond is, do you? Yes. Go on in, describe it to me. It's an electrostatic attractive force between a hydrogen atom, which is bound to a more electronegative atom or group. And another electronegative atom bearing a lone pair of electrons. Basically, electrons making molecules a little bit sticky. All right, we're competing. So you were listening, then, I'm impressed. A little bit. OK, well, today we are going to try and answer as many of your questions about water as we can. And we're going to stay hydrated throughout one of my eight glasses a day. Do you drink a glass of water a day? Mm-hmm. Why, too? You know, there's quite a lot of myth about water. And this is one of them. Really? That you're supposed to drink a glass of water a day, yeah. So there are people who say that you have to drink water to flush out toxins through your kidneys. OK, what's wrong with that, then? Well, I mean, let's just start with the fact that there's no such thing as toxins, at least not in the way that's implied by those sort of woo-woo descriptions. And more importantly, your kidneys filter about 180 litres of blood every single day. So one extra glass of water is really not going to make any difference at all. Just makes sure we're a bit less yellow. So where do the eight glasses think come from? This is back in 1945, the US Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council. They told adults to consume one milliliter of water for every calorie that they eat a day. So 2,000 calories for women, about two litres of water, women two and a half litres for men. But that included the water that was in food. If you eat 2,000 calories of watermelon, you're not going to need to drink two and a half litres of water on top. Right, because watermelon, by its very name, is mostly water. Mostly water and a little bit of pink on top. That's what I think is made up. A few decades later, 1974, there was a book Nutrition for Good Health, and they recommended that the average adult consumes between six to eight glasses of water a day. But as the authors wrote, this can include fruit and veg and caffeinated drinks and soft drinks. But this is amazing. This is one of those classic fudges, isn't it? Where bits and bobs of real information and advice have been stuck in a blender whizzed up when they've come out being utterly bobbin. Basically, yeah. Of course you need water, not suggesting you shouldn't drink water, especially if you're in his dark, especially if you exercise and you sweat a lot. But there isn't a set amount that you need to drink to be okay. Essentially, just drink when you're thirsty. Here's another thing. Do you know what would happen if you drank really, really pure water? Like distilled water. No, I mean, like 100% water says it's got literally nothing else in it, just H2O. No, tell me. Your cells would explode and you would die. From water? Yes, yes. How? So, this is a concept called tonicity, which is about how much salt there is in liquid, or how many impurities there are in liquid. You know the water that we drink from a tap or from even when we buy bottled water, it contains loads of impurities, trace levels. But if you look at the ingredients, it says things like magnesium chloride and sodium chloride. Borts and minerals. Exactly. Do you remember, like, they used to advertise for isotonic drinks? Like sports drinks. Exactly. So isotonic means it's the same salt concentration in the drink as it is in your cells. Right? So there's no transfer of liquid between the cells and outside of the cells because the liquid is the same salt concentration. When you drink it, there isn't sort of rushing into your body or out of your body. Exactly. If it's not isotonic, you can be hypotonic or hypotonic. So when you drink a hypotonic solution, the cells themselves lose water. The water rushes out of them and they can shrivel up. And when you drink a hypotonic solution, which has no salt in it whatsoever, the water will rush into the cells causing them to swell up and explode, causing you to definitely die. Such a fine line between essential for life and will kill you today. That is definitely true, but that's biology. Anyway, we had a bunch of other questions about water that we're going to try and answer today. This one came in from Nasira Ellis, who asked, why is water in rivers cold when the molecules are clearly moving? That is a very good question. Now, I have to tell you one thing about heat and water though before we get there. Is this going to be about hydrogen bonds? We'll see. You can close to the limit of hydrogen bonds. We are going to have to wait and see. Okay. Imagine if you put a pan of water on the hob. Have you noticed that it doesn't get warmer for ages and age and ages, and then all of a sudden, it comes to a boil very quickly? No, because I'd mostly use a kettle. Okay, sure. If you were to, you would know that actually water needs more energy to raise its temperature than almost any other liquid with other liquid or gases. If you put energy in, like by putting it on the hob, putting it over a flame, that that energy goes straight into moving those molecules around, either by making them vibrate or by making them swirl around the pan. Water, however, has a structure that other liquids don't have. This treasure hunt, she is our quantum physics expert for Victoria University in New Zealand. The difference with water is it has these lovely hydrogen bonds. Told you. If you put some energy into water, you start to excite these hydrogen bonds and then they start to break apart. So you add energy in and you add energy in. Rather than seeing a temperature rise, what's happening is internally you're breaking these hydrogen bonds. It's only once you have disrupted them to a certain extent that you actually start seeing the temperature rise, which has the kinetic energy of the water molecules. And then that's when you get our rise and your temperature. I am going to make a hydrogen bond bingo card at this rate. Okay, okay, but hang on. Just go with me on this. Because you know, you can also use the molecular structure of water to your advantage when you're trying to heat it. So last week we talked about how a water molecule has one positively charged side and one negatively charged side. And that means that water molecules like to turn themselves around, they like to align themselves with a magnetic field. So if you had, I don't know, some kind of high frequency electromagnetic radiation, that really quickly switched direction between positive and negative, positive and negative, those water molecules would always want to be facing the right direction. And so very quickly you could make them spin. Well, yes. I mean, that sounds implausible though, does such a fantastical machine actually exist? Yes, we call such contraptions microwaves. Did you know that your microwave is exciting the rotational motions of water molecules and they are going round and round and what they're doing is their energy is spreading out. And then those water molecules start bouncing off the other molecules in your drink or whatever it is. And so they transfer their energy as heat. So a microwave is a very specific way of generating heat and water. Is that how it works? It microwaves just a giant water spinning machine. Yes, yes. I am learning so much. I can't tell you from this conversation. I'm never going to look at water in quite the same way again. Well, this is all very interesting, but that doesn't explain why the water and the river that are questioning a sugar L.A.s asked about. That is moving too and it doesn't get warm like in a micro-abi. No, but that all comes down to the different ways in which molecules can move. So there is rotational energy, which is when something spins around as in your microwave. There is vibrational energy when something jiggles on the spot. But there is also something called translational energy when something moves from one place to another. If we're heating water up, it's not moving anywhere, is it? It's not all getting up and walking two centimetres down the bath. So it means that this energy that we're giving the water is going into very random motions and there's no net movement of the substance, going in one direction and it's balanced by everything going in another direction. But actually, it's going really fast. The water molecules in water at about 20 degrees are moving at about 600 metres per second. But if we think about a stream, the water molecules in this stream are only going at about 1.4 metres per second. So there's a huge difference in the speed of what's happening. And the other thing is, of course, the river is all going in the same direction. And so that doesn't contribute to temperature because temperature is about this random motion that's going in all different directions. It's not a collective motion thing. Well, that is very cool. We've had a lot of physics so far, so I think we should have some biology now. I'll allow it. I'm good. Thank you for a very gracious of you. So let's just go back to that idea that water heats very slowly at first and then suddenly suddenly starts to boil the heat capacity. Yeah, well, I mean, it takes a lot of energy to change the temperature of water. Exactly, right? You will note that when you go out and play in the snow, your body temperature doesn't suddenly drop. It's maintained at a fairly steady state. And I guess also, if you walk out into somewhere really harsh, you don't immediately boil, which is, I think, handy for life. Yes. So this idea that the amount of energy it takes to change the temperature of water, it changes depending on how hot the water is. So when you put the pan on first and it's tepid, it takes a lot of energy to change its temperature. But what do you get up to boiling, actually, those last few degrees C? Exactly. Happen really quickly. And this is the concept of heat capacity. Now, do you know when their heat capacity of water is at its absolute lowest? So the point at which it takes the least amount of energy to change the temperature? Exactly. No. Temperature is around about 36 degrees plus or minus. Body temperature? Yeah, exactly. Go on. Well, we're not sure whether this is a coincidence or not, but let's just work this through as an idea. You know, almost all mammals have body temperatures between 30 and 40 degrees. So the idea here then is your fuel temperature drops a little bit. Actually, you need to use as little energy as possible to get your temperature back up to normal. It is a very neat coincidence that... ...is that why water is so important for life? Well, that's what I mean by being a neat coincidence, because we can't say for sure we don't know which way round it is. And this is an idea, which I think is very interesting one. We sometimes call it the anthropic principle. It's a fallacy that the universe is the way it is in order that human life can exist or mammalian life can exist. I think one of the best thinkers on this subject is Douglas Adams. We always ask ourselves why, because we look for intention around us. We look at the rocks and we look at the trees and we wonder what intention is here, even though it doesn't have intention. We think so, what did this person who made this world intended for? And this is the point where you think, well, it fits me very well. He must have made it for me. And it's rather like a puddle waking up. I know they don't normally do this, but allow me. I'm a science fiction writer. A puddle wakes up one morning and thinks, this is a very interesting world I find myself in. It fits me very neatly. In fact, it fits me so neatly. I mean, really precise, isn't it? It must have been made to have me in it. And the sun rises and gradually the puddle is shrinking and shrinking and shrinking. And by the time the puddle ceases to exist, it's still trapped in this idea that the pole was there for it. And if we think the world is here for us, we will continue to destroy it in the way that we've been destroying it. Look, when you bring Douglas Adams to the party, I mean, that's just an instant win for me. It is, isn't it? It's just a smackdown. There is such a strong link though, between life and water. So we're not quite ready to completely abandon that idea between heating, you know, the heat capacity of water and life itself. Philball, Polymath, one-time physicist and author of H2O, a biography of water. Well, he had to go at explaining this. This is a really important property of water, because it means that when water does get warmer, there's tons of heat stored away in it, because you've had to put so much in to raise its temperature. That's what happens in the oceans, that warm ocean currents are basically storing loads and loads of heat. And so when those warm currents come up from the tropics around the equator, when they come up towards polar regions as they do in the oceans, they're carrying with them loads of heat. And that's really important for redistributing heat on the surface of the earth, so that basically you don't get real extremes of temperature, that it's really warm in the tropics and really, really cold in the poles. It might feel that way, but it would be far more extreme if water in the ocean currents wasn't transporting heat up towards the poles. So it keeps our planet at a nice sort of ambient temperature range, where there's really very little variation between the hottest and coldest, at least in relative terms. There's surely more to it than that though. I mean, surely there are other liquids that could do the same job at distributing heat across an entire planet as long as you had an ocean of the stuff. But the way you're describing this, you're saying that water is essential for life. And actually, this was another question that we had in from Olly Gordon, aged 10 from Christchurch in New Zealand. And he asked, why does all life depend on water so much? Yeah, it's a great question, because it is essential for life on earth. But it might be that there are other forms of life that we don't know about, and that life might be possible using other liquids that aren't water. Does life absolutely have to use liquids full stop? Well, again, good question. And I think the answer to that is probably yes. If you look at a biochemistry textbook, they'll say, well, we need to have a solvent in ourselves, a liquid, basically, so that the proteins can move around and bump into each other and do their stuff. And so water is just this sort of passive backdrop, this passive solvent. It dissolves proteins because it's a good solvent, and it just lets them move around. Well, that's part of what it's doing. But when you look closely, water is doing lots of really clever subtle things in biochemistry. So it's surrounding proteins with a shell of water that is actually kind of structured to respond to what's on the surface of the protein. So the protein is kind of arranging water molecules in certain ways. And a lot of proteins are enzymes, so they bind on to some other substance and they catalyze a chemical reaction that transforms them in some way. That binding often uses water. If you look at the little pocket where the protein binds whatever it is going to react with, there's often water molecules that are acting like little bridges to enable that binding to happen, that little hydrogen bonding bridges between the protein and the molecule with binding. So water is being really useful there. So the water molecules then they're acting almost like a scaffolding for the protein molecules. I mean, that's pretty cool. It is, and this is relatively new science. It's not just that water is a solvent for dissolving stuff in it that flows in and out of cells. It appears to have this sort of physical structure to it, which actually allows biochemistry to happen. Another thing, a really useful and amazing thing that water molecules do is they form water wires in proteins. There are plenty of proteins that act as kind of channels to let things pass through. For example, there are plenty in our cell membranes, which let things in and out of cells. Otherwise, they couldn't get through. They let ions in and out of cells. That's what happens in neurons. It's what creates the electrical signals in neurons. So what sometimes is happening in those situations is that you've got water molecules inside that thread through in a hydrogen bonded chain, one water molecule, hydrogen that not bonded to the next, the next, the next and so on. And they're called water wires, not just because they're long thin structures, but because they do actually conduct, but they don't conduct electrons, electricity. They conduct hydrogen ions. And hydrogen ions are really important in biochemistry. They're involved in lots of different reactions. And what happens is that if you've got a water wire threading through a protein poor and a hydrogen ion sticks to a water molecule at one end, all the water molecules can just kind of turn and pass a hydrogen ion effectively between them and it pops off the other end. It's a bit like those Newton's cradles where one ball hits one end and the other ball pops off the other. And so these water wires can conduct hydrogen ions really, really quickly. And this actually happens in water too, that hydrogen ions zip about in water much quicker than we would expect them to because of the same process. So in this way, water in biochemistry is really helping biochemistry do its thing by transporting hydrogen ions around. So bizarre. I mean, biochemistry wasn't my strong suit, but I'm trying to think if there's any reactions, biochemical reactions that happen in living organisms that are not in some way dependent on water at a minimum as a solvent, and I can't think of any. Well, I mean, you know, what water is doing, it's not just kind of surrounding the proteins, the enzymes, it's actually making sure that the proteins have the shape that they need to have to do their job. So enzymes, they're basically long chains that are folded up into a three-dimensional shape that is just ripe for doing the job. And that only happens in water. If you take a protein out and put it into some other liquid or just into a vacuum, then it either, it kind of just falls apart or it just becomes rigid. And if it becomes rigid, it's no good either because they need to be able to wobble a bit to do their job properly. So what water is doing is holding them together, but also just allowing them enough kind of floppiness to enable them to do their job. So it's actually doing a really subtle thing in helping proteins and enzymes in particular to function. Okay, we've got water, which is weirdly sticky because of hydrogen bonds, and is essential for life, not just as solvent in ourselves, but because it stores heat very well. And it acts as a kind of scaffold for all those tricky metabolic reactions that keep us alive. Yes, and of course we only know one type of life, which is earth-bound life. We don't even know whether this could work in other substances, other non-water-based life in the rest of the universe. But there is plenty of water in the universe, isn't there? There is, but it's not always liquidy water. And we think that it needs to be liquidy water for life to exist. You know the concept of the Goldilocks zone? Not too hot, not too cold. Yeah, but just right. And that, the just right, is liquid water. Now, even that concept, though, is a little bit limiting. Is Phil Balligan? There's actually a lot of places where there is some degree of liquid water, even in our own solar system. So, you know, it's pretty much agreed that on Jupiter's moons, Calisto and Europa in particular, that there seems to be a whole liquid water ocean underneath their icy surface, probably also underneath the moon and cellarus, the moon of Saturn. So even outside this Goldilocks zone, it seems that there are some places where liquid water can survive. Venus is actually the only other planet that's normally inside this Goldilocks zone. But Venus is really, really hot. It's been warmed by basically a greenhouse effect, so that there's no liquid water on its surface. But Venus does have these really thick clouds. And there was a lot of excitement last year, when group of astronomers reported that they thought they had detected in those clouds a molecule called phosphine. It's a phosphorous molecule. And there's no known way that phosphine can be produced in a purely geological process, so one that doesn't involve life. And so, you know, if they really had seen it, it raised the possibility that maybe it's being produced by little microorganisms in Venus' clouds. Because they are droplets. They are liquid droplets. However, the thing about these droplets is they're not water droplets. They're droplets of really, really strong sulfuric acid. And, you know, a lot of people said when they heard that claim, well, Craig, how can life survive in almost neat sulfuric acid? But actually, that's not the problem. Because there are organisms microbes on Earth that can survive in really, really acidic conditions. They can find ways to do that. The real problem is how much water is actually there. If they're almost all sulfuric acid, there's only a little bit of water. Is there enough water in those droplets to support life? This is something that a group of astronomers, and astrobiologists, and geologists, and me did a study on just recently to try to figure out how much water is actually available for potential living organisms in the clouds of Venus. On Earth, we know that all organisms seem to require a certain amount of water. It's measured in terms of what's called the water activity. Which is really like the concentration of water. I mean, it seems a bit weird, because we normally think of the concentration of other things in water, like the salt and seawater. But actually, you know, if it's a mixture, then there's a concentration of water in there, too. And the water activity on Earth, if it falls below a value of about 0.58, that's equivalent to about 58% humidity, if it falls below that, things are too dry for organisms to exist. The calculations for the cloud droplets on Venus, we found that the water activity is more than 200 times less than that lower limit on Earth. So what this seems to imply is that there can't really, which is very hard to see how there could be Earth-like microbes on Venus, because the cloud droplets are just too dry. If there's any sort of life at all in those clouds, it would have to have a very, very different sort of biochemistry to anything we know on Earth. But still very wet. If you say so, I do, actually, because you know it occurs to me, that planet Earth's actually quite a bad name. I mean, there is like 1.3597, 828 times 10 to the 21 litres of water on this planet. All right Wikipedia. And really, it's a difficult planet water. Yeah, well, I absolutely agree with that. And one of the things I always think about when you hear about how watery this planet is is, is where did all the water come from? No one really knows. There's still a lot of debate about it, but there is certainly a wide belief that a lot of the water that's now on Earth came here from outer space. It arrived here as ice on asteroids, because you know, in the very, very early days of the Earth, when the planet had just formed, it was still really, really hot. It was basically just this bubbling mass of lava. And so it was too hot for oceans to form. All the water that might have been around to begin with came off the steam into the atmosphere and got sort of boiled away. And so it had to be replenished with water. And the idea is that that came on icy asteroids. Most asteroids are actually, basically, ice balls with maybe a bit of rock in the middle. So asteroids are full of water, and they were raining down, in particular, much more heavily. They were raining down on the early Earth. And that's where the oceans seem to have come from. Now, I wrote this in one of my books. I'm saying this quietly, because I'm not sure how true it is. But I think that there's more water locked in the rocks of the Earth than there is in the oceans. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah, well, you know, that's the thing that we often sort of overlook about water, that it's everywhere. And it certainly is in lots and lots of minerals, because it can get locked away sort of in the crystal structure of many minerals. They're very rich in water. So it's true that in the deeper, in the minerals of the deeper, there is loads of water. And it's some of the reactions of that water that take place in the deeper, that are crucial for changing the mineral composition of the Earth. Right, that is enough now about planetary water, I think. We've got some more watery questions. Here is one. Is water the most bubbly liquid? And that was sent in by me, because I was actually talking to Helen Jeski, who is a physicist and the most expert expert on bubbles. So the thing is, there aren't actually that many liquids. If you think about most of the things we have around is in everyday life, most of them are based on water. So most bubbles are in water, because most liquid is water. And water by itself has a very high surface tension. I think second only to mercury. What bubbles need to have a nice round shape is a high surface tension, because that pulls the bubble back into a spherical shape or pulls it towards a more spherical shape. Water makes particularly long lasting bubbles, because it's got a strong surface tension, which stops them breaking up. Although then they might rise to the surface quickly and burst. So most bubbles in the world are in water, and water is really good at making bubbles. And the important thing about bubbles in water is they are doing things all the time. They don't just sit there. You have what becomes a two-phase mixture, which means it's a gas and a liquid, which are not mixing with each other, but you've got a bubble of gas and the liquid around it. And that behaves differently from just the gas or just the liquid on its own. And it's really important, and the bubbles can actually pull the liquid along. If you're one of those people that shakes up a can of a fizzy drink and then cracks the top open, you get this fountain of liquid. The reason the liquid comes out is that the bubbles dragged it there. So bubbles are doing things all the time, and this combination of high surface tension and relatively low viscosity for water is what gives us all this richness of behaviour and the bubbles. OK, so bubbles big tick there. Another question you came in from Barbara Dyson who wrote in asking, why is it that cold water sounds different when it's being poured than boiling water? Do you know about this? No. Have you never noticed this before? No. Oh, I absolutely agree with her. This is how she describes it. She says, I know that I've forgotten to switch the kettle on for my morning cover, because when I pour the water onto the tea bag, it just doesn't sound right. Boiling water sounds smooth. Our cold water is more, ah, actually, why don't you listen and see if you can guess. Here are two clips. One of them is cold water, one is hot, which is which? What do you think? Well, I definitely need to go to the loo now. Ah, I don't know. I mean, I have devoted no seconds to thinking about this in my 46 years. I'm going to go with a second one was boiling. You're right. Is it? I think it's really obvious. The first one sounds cold. There's no other way to explain it. It sounds cold. And I think the boiling water just sounds a lot smoother. And that's not just me making it up. There's actually a sort of explanation for this. His vote ball. Yeah, that is, I mean, I'd never thought about that before either, but I'm pretty sure that what is, I'd love to see a controlled experiment here where we can really tell the difference. But I think that, you know, generally when you're pouring something from a kettle, it's bubbling, right? So I think that's the difference that you've got little bubbles of water vapor forming in this very hot liquid. And that's a process called cavitation, the formation of bubbles within the liquid. That takes a lot of energy. Basically, you've got to break apart all those hydrogen bonds and form the gas. So cavitation is a really energetic process. And when it happens, sometimes it happens with a little pop. And you can actually, in very careful experiments, you can hear these little pops. And I think that's what we're picking up. We're picking up the acoustic signature of cavitation in the hot water. Okay, our final water question. Okay, this came in from Chris Wiesbianski and he asked us, when I open a plastic bin liner, I lick my fingers in order to get enough grip to separate the two sides. I imagine that some of the listeners are doing this right now. We'll do. Yeah, exactly. But when I last went to a water park, they pour water down the flume to help me slip down better. So which is it? Does water increase or decrease friction between plastic and human skin? Let's ask Phil Bool. It's a really good question. And it's actually not easy to answer. I mean, if you look around on the internet for an answer to this, you'll find loads of different answers and some of them don't make sense at all. What I think is going on is this. They're actually, most liquids will act as lubricants. Okay, they'll make two surfaces slide against each other because they flow. And so if there's a thin film of the liquid in between, then the surfaces can move over one another. And this happens for water as well. It certainly happens on a big scale. It's way roads more slippery when they're wet. What's happening with the plastic bag is quite specific to that scale. It works for your fingers. It doesn't work for tires on a slippery road when they're bigger. They have less grip. That's, I think, because what's going on when you wet your fingers is to do with surface tension. Actually, the surface tension that is created in that little wet interface between your fingers and the plastic bag creates a bit of grip. You get a bit of stickiness there. But the surface tension is only relevant over certain length scales, maybe a few millimeters or so. So I think that's what's going on there. That the wet fingers are relying on that bit of surface tension, the little sort of film of water and particularly the meniscus at the edges of that film that is sticking them together. Because surface tension always tries to pull surfaces into the smallest possible area and that creates a little bit of grip between your fingers and the plastic. What's the most important thing that is sticking them together? Wow, well, that was a bit of a watery quest, wasn't it, Dr. Fry? Certainly was, Dr. Rutherford. We have answered five questions on why water is so weird and lots more of a sudden. Why ice is less dense than liquid water? Hyggeobons? Why water is so good at storing heat? Hyggeobons? And all of those things make water the weird substance that is essential for life as we know it. Hyggeobons? Let's never say hygeobons ever again. Yep, let's never mention hygeobons ever again. Okay, I think that's what that'd be all right. That'd be all right. You know, that idea about water change in the color of your urine. So it is important, if you have dark urine, it's important, you know, so it's a good sign that you're dehydrated. But you know, in the NHS, people were working so hard, they were forgetting to drink. They weren't like registering that they were thirsty. And so they wanted to run a big campaign to encourage people to drink more water. So they put up posters saying, drink more water and no one did it. They'd sort of tried to give out water bottles, no one did it. And then what they did in the toilets, they put up a poster which just showed different colors of urine and said, which one are you? And that made a massive difference. Oh, really? Let alone not. Where they started drinking their own urine. I'm not sure. Did I miss the point of that story? I mean, maybe I just told it badly. No, not at all. I got a quick story as well before we get onto the business end of the pod. You know, we've talked about the Goldilocks zone. Um, the... So, you know, I may have mentioned that I've worked on a couple of films as a science advisor. It's never come up. I've never come up, is it? At all. One of the films I worked on a few years ago was called The Kingsman. It was quite a fun film about the Secret Spy Organization. Quite a firm, isn't it? Exactly. Colin Firth. It's the only film I've watched in the last decade. It's a good one. Anyway, I worked on that for a few days. And one of the jobs I was doing on it was there's a scene that was filmed at Imperial. There's a scene where one of the characters who's played by Mark Hamill, who was Luke Skywalker, is a climate change professor. And he gets kidnapped and I think killed, spoiler alert for a film that's 15 years old. Anyway, one of my jobs, Dhammerous as it is, was to decorate his blackboard so that it looked super sciencey. That was my brief. Make this super sciencey. And I did. And I made it as relevant to climate change because he was a climate scientist. Well, I put loads of little graphs on it that I'd taken from scientific papers. And then I did it once. And then the director came in and said, make it more sciencey. So I just brought a little nonsense from that point on. And anyway, at one point I was like, no one's gonna, who's gonna look at this? I just wanted to look sciencey. So I started pulling up a bit of Darwin style. Did you put an Adam is cool? I put loads of Easter eggs in it. And you can't see them in the film. But I've got a freeze frame in one of my talks of the best focus of any of them. But when I found out that the actor who was Mark Hamill, who plays Luke Skywalker, I just decided to put a load of Star Wars Easter eggs on it. And one of them is this famous graph which describes the Goldilocks zone. I say it's got temperature and distance from the sun on the two axes. And it's got the planets on it. And it's got this sort of funnel in the middle for the planets which are in the zone which is just right, which includes Earth. And I think Mars and I think maybe Venus. Yeah, possibly. In my version of it, it also contains Tatooine and Hall and Dagobah. And that's my story. You're so proud of yourself. I really am. I think about 32% of the listeners will think that's amazing and the others will have your reaction. Is he talking about... No, I think that's very cute. He's a human being. Past and curious occasion, the least curious, totaling machine. Rather than a prize, Curio of the Week. We have a letter today for Curio of the Week. Hello, doctors, rather than a prize. I'm writing for a Vietnam where I teach secondary school music at an international school. I was inspired by some of your musical Curio of the Week selections. So I have transcribed and arranged your theme song for one of my concert bands. There's a lot of wonderful things. Two seasons. Mostly beginners on the internet. This is going to be very interesting indeed. Okay, shall we have a little listen? It says, we had fun learning it. I hope you enjoyed it. Even if it's not as polished as the Fulugan Horn players recording, we will be the judge of that. So thank you very much. Okay, here we go. This, by the way, is from Leely Dirkson. I think that's absolutely brilliant. It makes it sound not like the theme tune, but a sort of 1950s Italian mafia film. Just proceeding a wedding dance and a massive murder. I feel like I can hear the concentration in every note. That definitely earned your full band's worth of Curio of the Week. We got a double Curio, though, because a double musical theme to on as well, because we had another letter also referencing Fulugan Horn, Leely, dear doctors, F and R. I don't know, I'm not familiar with that. I'm not not not bad. Following Fulugan Horn, Ladies, rendition of your theme tune, you lay down a challenge for more wacky instrument versions. I don't actually remember, but laying down that challenge. Did you do that? You barely remember, you know, for breakfast, man. That is definitely true. Anyway, here's my version. And this comes from Adam Broughton, recorded using the following. Oh. I don't even know how to pronounce some of these. OK, but there's one of them's an Udo. Then there's a Marimba. Next one's a Garned House Pie. We know that one. Scrapey Frog. Scrapey Frog. Is that an instrument? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's the one that goes. Oh, OK. Yeah. Dark Cool. Nice. Or Kestrel Whip. You just keep that to yourself, man. Dear bottle. Empty exclamation mark. Vibros lap. Car brake drum. And jingling jones. These are... It's definitely making these up. Go on, let's hear it. MUSIC Amazing. Amazing. I think that is. My favorite bit was the duck. I don't know what I was just about to say. My least favorite bit was the duck. I think that's one too many. That is over-egging it. No, it's not egging it enough. Oh, more duck. Exactly. More cowbell, more duck. Exactly. Right, man of egg. That is absolutely incredible. So you are definitely our second cure of the week. Bad John, it's way. That's the moment it hit me. I'm like, oh my gosh, I think I'm an occult. I used to think to myself, these people are mad until I realized I'm mad as well. I'm Paris Lees. And this is the flip side. In each episode, I tell two stories from opposite sides of the coin. And use science to ask questions about elements of the human experience that we sometimes take for granted. I know that we're genetically related, but in my mind, I don't have the feeling that we are necessarily kin. My dad said, you know that we love you. And I am your father. But... Subscribe to the flip side with me, Paris Lees, on BBC Sounds.
