I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello and welcome to the final episode in the current series, series six of the curious cases of me and her. Indeed. And in this episode, we try and kill people with sound, although not literally. Yes, it's a really music dominated episode because this question has been inspired by a Kate Bush song in which she almost definitely admits that she tried to build a sonic weapon. Yeah, no, no, she doesn't do that for legal reasons. We have to be really clear that she doesn't do this poor good field wrote him about the song experiment for which is about the most 80s thing that has ever happened. The video of it is amazing. It is astonishing. And it's got loads of like really now famous people like Hugh Laurie and Gary Oldman and some seriously dodgy CGI. Some really bad CGI, but it's very non metaphorical video. We put it that way. It's true, it's true. And we take it quite seriously. Well, you did for legal reasons. I'd like to absolutely separate my own view about the metaphorical status of this song. Should we ever listen to the programme? Yes, although I think before we move on, I think that it's worth mentioning how very lovely one of our podcast listeners have been to us over the course of the last week. Yes, they've given us a really lovely warm, fluffy feeling because we, well, we asked them to review the programme. Only because we were forced to. Yeah, people came to you and they said some really nice stuff. So thank you very much. That really does mean a lot. So that was a bit cheesy, wasn't it? It's just nice. It's just nice when people listen and you know it's not, you're just your dad saying, yeah, good show some. Anyway, enough of that. On with the show. Today for the last episode in our current series, we bring you the curious case of Kate Bush's Sonic weapon. Sorry, what? Yes, this intriguing question was sent into curious cases at BBC.co.uk by Paul Goodfield from Pontodullis in Wales. It started while listening to the excellent experiment for by Kate Bush. The premise of the song is of a band who secretly worked for the military to create a sound that could kill someone. Is it scientifically possible to do this? Okay, to start our investigation, I think we have to go back to the original source material. Right, she has exactly gone heavy on the metaphor on this one. So Kate Bush is making a Sonic weapon that could kill someone from a distance. For legal reasons, we should point out that Kate Bush was merely reporting on the creation of this weapon, not actually making it herself. She says we, but whatever. Can you kill someone with sound? I know who to ask on this one. Acoustic engineer Trevor Cox from Sulford University. We have this kind of sense that sound is incredibly powerful because we have such strong responses to it. We kind of think that it's really strong because it can move us to tears. It can make the hair stand up on the back of your neck. But these are all psychological effects. Actually, sound as little vibrations of air molecules is incredibly weak. And so it's really difficult to cause any great physical damage. What if it was really loud though? Well, you can't get to the point where you could go to the paintbrush old, which is about 140 decibels, go a bit louder up to say 160 decibels and you can brush your ear drums. And if you get even louder, you can actually make your lung collapse. But none of that's probably killed you so far. Well, I don't know, if you collapse both lungs, you're getting pretty close. I would imagine so. I'm not a medic, but it's something I definitely would want to avoid. So how easy is it to make a sound that loud then? Yeah, if you think of when you turn up at music festival, how big the sound systems are, can you imagine the military having to cart around these ginormous loudspeakers to try and make these noises? So this is one of the reasons as an acoustic weapon, not a very practical device. Yeah, it's carrying our massive bass bins on the back of your tank. Does it tend to give away your position to the enemy, doesn't it? Not to mention the fact that you deffin all of your troops as well as the enemies if you turn them up to 11. Right, so not ideal. There we go. Okay, self bit of a short program this week listeners. Not so fast, Robert, because that is audible sound. But what about frequencies that are outside of the human range of hearing? Go on. Well, if you go down to lower frequencies, you reach what's known as Infra Sound. During the Cold War, the race was on for nations across the world to invent deadly new weapons. French scientist Vladimir Gavreau was busy developing battle-feel robots when his team fell ill with a nausea that lasted for days. They had accidentally discovered Infra Sound, waves at around 19 hertz, but below human hearing, which caused the sickness. They set about designing huge wide organ pipes around twice the length of a double decker bus. To produce a noise, they claimed was in the range of death. After testing, they reported that the whole building shook, and their hearts, lungs and stomachs were filled with painful spasms that made them cry. Really? Explain this to me, Doctor Fry. Why aren't these Infra Sound's used in every battle field then? Well, nobody's actually managed to replicate any of Gavreau's findings ever since somebody she... Ha, right. So Infra Sound has become links, though, to another mysterious phenomenon. One evening in the bygone age known as the 1980s, the late computer scientist Amateur Conjurer and keen fencing maestro Vic Tandy, a very strange experience. Parapsychologist Chris French from Goldsmiths University takes up the story. He was working in a reputably haunted factory, working very late one evening, when he suddenly got a kind of very strange sense of dread, and out of the corner of his eye, actually thought he could see this kind of apparition appear, and it freaked him out, and, suddenly, he thought, oh my god, I'm working too much, and went home for the evening, came back in the next day, and he had a fencing foil with him that he needed to do some work on. As you do? As you do. As a scientist? To have a fencing foil with you? Yeah, so he put this into a vice, and to his surprise, the foil began to vibrate, and he thought, oh my god, it's happening again, but being someone who had some training in science, he realised, well, I must be some energy coming from somewhere to cause this. So by moving the foil around, he realised it vibrated in some areas, not in others, and a few back at the envelope calculations he decided that there must be a standing wave of infrasonic energy at around about 19 hertz, and subsequently, he claimed that this was actually caused by a faulty fan, an extractor fan that was in the room, but that doesn't necessarily account for his initial reaction, which was that he had a vision, or he caught something out of the corner, he's always fixing it out. When the papers was written up, they proposed that maybe this was because this was the resonant frequency of the human eyeball, and that some way it was causing his eyeball to vibrate. Hang on, let me get that straight. An infrasonic wave was resonating his eyeballs, and that made him see strange visions. Right, well, that was Victor Andy's conclusion, but Chris French decided to put this theory to the test by designing his own experiments that he called the Horned Project. Was that supposed to be an impression of Vincent French? I'm really sorry about that. He actually built, not Vincent Price, Chris French built, an artificial sort of haunted chamber, pumped full of infrasound and other electromagnetic waves associated with eerie feelings to see if partissants had a dispute either in session. And what we found was that quite a proportion of our participants did report mildly anomalous sensations, which we were quite excited about. We analysed our results, and we found it didn't matter whether the infrasound was on our off. What we did find it correlated with was their scores on a particular questionnaire to measure temporal lobe libility. Now what that means is that people with particularly susceptible temporal lobes sometimes under appropriate conditions that get unusual activity in the temporal lobes of the brain, and that's what was causing the hallucinations. I see, I see. Which is an interesting idea, but we also know that this scale correlates with suggestibility. Right. So the most plausible explanation is that if you say to suggestible people, if you go in here, you might experience some weird stuff, some of them will. So we're also ruling infrasound out for Kate Bush's Weapons. Well, yes. Man, we are the kings of the debunking today. I know. Okay, but I don't think we can dismiss them altogether. A few non-lethal sonic weapons have been developed in the past. There was one called the Scork Box and another called the Curdler, both of which emitted unpleasant sounds to disperse and in 2012 there was a leaked US report containing a whole suite of new gadgets such as the improved flashbang grenade, which basically temporarily blinds you and defends you at 140 decibels. Sounds pleasant. Not really. And the impulse swimmer gun for repelling attacks from scuba divers by making them vomit in their own face masks. These people have been watching waiting much James. Yeah, I know, but still they haven't managed to invent the exploding pen. The truth is that most of these languished in development and I don't think they can be really classed as effective weapons. Okay, but let's give back to the original question based around the song Experiment 4. This is another piece of evidence I've unearthed about the kind of weapon that Kate Bush was definitely developing. Allegedly, allegedly. We were called to do down more to do down to our machine. I see. So we're talking about psychologically disturbing sounds. Sounds like Kate Bush is contravening several parts of the engineering convention here. Allegedly, please. So we've concluded that it's hard to make a sound loud enough to damage our body, but can it mess with our minds? I checked with acoustic engineer Trevor Cox. Certainly people are playing around with unpleasant sounds. We all know that if you scrape fingernails down the blackboard, it's pretty unpleasant. Well, you can imagine playing that loud lit people will be unpleasant. Maybe maybe make people go away. There's a couple of examples come to mind which are aimed at teenagers. One is just to play classical music as a way of getting them to move away from places. Maybe they're loitering outside shops. And that's obviously got nothing to do with the paying threshold or anything. They don't think it's a bit nasty. Teenagers just don't like rock man enough. Well, the other effect you've got for teenagers is the sting called the mosquito device which is quite controversial because you play quite high level high frequency sound that only teenagers can hear and it is quite unpleasant. Okay, well this is definitely one that we can test out on the radio. And apologies to any teenagers. We promise we won't play it very loud, but see if you can hear this. Well, I'm hearing anything. That's because you're well-oiled. Did you hear it? No. Well, so are you there. The truth is that you can only hear this sound into your early 20s before the hair cells in your ears become desensitized and you lose the top frequencies. But okay, if we're thinking about sounds that drive us mad, Kate Bush might want to look a little bit closer to home because even music has been used as a form of torture as Trevor Cox told me. There's quite a lot of military uses for it. So I remember from Narry's younger, Noriega was hold up in the Embassy in Panama and the US military started playing Bruce Springsteen at him from vast-life speakers to try and get him to surrender. I guess that's kind of a psychological battle. The other one was something called the Manolo Effect in Australia where they played Barry Manolo songs at people. You can imagine Bermuda Triangle and actually Manolo complained about that. Really? Oh no, making stuff. I can't take it anymore. I'm cutting hand at the Copacabana. We've got eight more hours of this. I tell you everything I know, please make it stop. Well, that was surprisingly easy. I had a whole repertoire of songs to try to Barney the Dinosaur, R&M, Rage Against the Machine. They have all been used as psychological torture before. In fact, so many songs that a bunch of musicians wrote to the US government in 2002 demanding that their music shouldn't be used as a form of torture in Guantanamo Bay. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to whether sound can kill, can we say Case Sold? Noise could rupture your eardrums at 160 decibels. That's a bit louder than standing right next to a jet engine. Or maybe collapse your lungs at 200 decibels. But the amount of kit you'd need makes it a pretty gumbassam weapon. Hello? And it's Kate Bush's lawyers. They urgently want to speak to you. We did ask Kate Bush to take part in this episode where we are say agent. They didn't even bother replying. Probably because she's too busy developing seat route weapons for you. It's weather the military. Top secret though, but she can't talk about. We know that Kate Bush is a massive fan of the show. We don't know that, but we assume that she's really into curious cases. She's got any taste at all. Yes. Along with many other massive artists from the 80s, we also know that Durand Durand, a huge fans too. Of course. And you're asking me to name artists in the 80s, okay? What's that guy in Rick Rolls-People? Rick Astley. He never returns our calls. Spand our ballet. Yeah. They're always foaming up. Boy George. Boy George, we can't get. Boy George is always calling up saying, can I be on the show? Right. Gligest alone, man. We'd love to have you on it. Get on with your own life. Maybe just on the podcast. I don't know. Seriously, boy. It's embarrassing. People call him boy George. Oh, doubt. Is this real? Do we get on with this? Anyway, we've got an extra interview clip with Chris French, who's the brilliant psychologist that we interviewed in the programme from Goldsmiths, who has specialised over the years over sort of parapsychology. He does really cool experiments. He does do really cool experiments. Almost all of which end up debunking super nature or ghosts. And the thing that we talk about in this episode was called the Haunt Project. When I was reading the paper, the publication, I couldn't help noticing something that didn't come up in the programme that made me fall about laughing, which is one of the metrics they used on participants, which is known as the Australian Sheepgoat scale. What does that measure? That's exactly what I asked him. So, before we get onto an interesting thing, there's something that this is not my world, parapsychology, but I'd never come across the... Well, the Australian Sheepgoat scale. Which is an important metric in your world. It's a very, very widely used scale. Within parapsychology, the believers are the Sheep and the skeptics and the goats. And it goes back to a biblical reference. I can't remember quite if it's Matthew 23 or whatever. When Jesus will divide the day of judgment, the flocks into Sheep and goats, the believers and the non-believers. And it's perfectly acceptable within parapsychology, but politically correct psychology. They really don't like you talking about Sheep and goats, believers and skeptics. I just love it. It's not just the Sheep and the goats presence in that word. It's also the fact that it's Australian and... Oh, and there's a scale. Oh, yeah. So, what, you could be sort of 40% goats, 60% sheep or Australia? Well, there isn't actually a specific subscale for Australian. Oh, that's a shame. What percentage do you? What of Australian or Sheep or goats? Yeah, Sheep and goat first. It's just one of those things where you just think scientists when they get given a free reign to name something. We do have this when we talk about black holes. It's true, the hairy black holes. It's so ridiculous. It is ridiculous, but we haven't had any letters of complaint. No, indeed. Now, during this series, we have asked you what we should call our secret club of podcast listeners. And you have come up with some pretty excellent suggestions, I've got to say. This week we've had the new suggestion of curious saders. Is that how you would say it? Curiosiders. Curiosiders. Curiosiders. It looks like crusaders. But curious. What do I see? That came in from Thomas Gregg who has... Oh, sorry, Thomas Gregg. He even put instructions on how to pronounce his name. It's Gregg Rhymes with Egg, not with League. Yeah, all right. So, what have we got? So, curious saders from Thomas. We've got the curious. Still, that's still my curious. Still one of my faves, I think that's from Singing, Hitrog on Twitter. Yes, the quidnunk, that was from Hannah Norton. And there's the brother, the Frid and Frie, regulars as well. That's your favorite, isn't it? That's from Jason Walker. Yeah, like the Sherlock Holmes reference in there. But look, so what we're going to do is we're going to put this to a vote on Twitter, on the Twitter's email or on email. Those are the four at the moment, but if we get better suggestions in, one of those four may be bumped. Sorry, if you are the one that gets bumped. We reserve the right to change the rules of the competition as we go along. Exactly, we do. It's not a competition. You're right, definitely not a competition. It's our special rules if it's a competition. There's nothing to win here. And what's going to happen is, so you write in, and also if you write in with questions or anything like that, curescasesatbbsc.co.uk, and we will reveal results in the next series, which starts in September, but we will reveal the results to the pod listeners first, because we're super special. Yeah, and the people who listen on the radio box, they won't even know. They don't know any of this. They don't know. It's so incredible. Now, it remains to credit various people for this series, beyond to me, in Adam and Maria Simon, so you guys are lovely production manager. Today, our studio manager was Steve Greenwood, and there's also that Michelle Martin, I produce her whatever. Sometimes presses a button, and then we can hear it, and other times only you can hear it. But she never presses a button, which means that only I can hear it. It's just fun, her whispering secret stuff in my ear about you. She say, though. I can't tell you, it's secret. I can see her mouth moving through the glass. What is she saying? Is it nice things? Is it sometimes that she says, Hannah, Hannah, that bit that Adam just did was really brilliant. If that makes you feel good to believe that, then let's go with that. So, please do, spending our seawall questions to Gilles Gace, that BBC.co.dk, and we will see you in September. Bye! This is the BBC. I'm Tim Harford, the presenter of a programme called More or Less, and I have a confession. I've been tempted, lured, seduced into the soft embrace of numbers. All around us, politicians, charities, campaigners and corporations know that a sure way to pick up some publicity is to make up an interesting sounding statistic, even if it's nonsense. Two times two is 22, four times four is 44. And on More or Less, that makes us sad because we think numbers matter and the truth matters. So we have two jobs to do. Destroy dodgy data with the rightest fury of 10,000 flaming sums, while also celebrating the ways in which honest statistics help us make sense of the world all around us, politics, business, health and life. So why not check us out? That's More or Less, with me, Tim Harford, on Radio 4, the World Service and available all year round as a podcast.
