Hello everyone, welcome to episode three of the podcast version of the curious cases of Fry and Rutherford. And in today's episode we are investigating the curious case of the space pirate. Did you like that? I did. I like that a lot. It's not actually about space pirates, it's about moon bases and living on Mars. And the very real possibility that in the next few years, decades, we'll have some permanent bases set up on either the moon or Mars. Yeah. Because it does sound like science fiction, doesn't it? I mean, there really are people whose actual jobs are to look into the practicalities of making this all work. Yep, that's absolutely right. And there are several missions across the world every year, where they effectively test how people are going to do. There's the Mars 500, there's the high seas, which is in Hawaii, which we speak to a couple of people who spend a year living in isolation in Hawaii. It's basically big brother in a tent in Hawaii. With one crucial difference, which is that on big brother they pick people who are horrible, quite horrible and are bound to do bad things to each other. Yeah. And on the high seas projects, they pick exactly the opposite. Nice people who are good. I seem to remember the tent was about, what was it, 11 metres wide? Not very big, is it? No, it's not very big. I don't think there's anyone in the world that want to be trapped in a tent for a year. How long do you think you'd last with me and Michelle for a year trapped in a tent in Hawaii? I've been on the one day a week that I've been spending room with the other mother fed. I mean, it's a highlight. I don't know, can I? It just doesn't matter to spend the time with you. The episode three of the curious cases of rather than Friday begins now. Thanks, bye. Did you know what's wrong with this planet? No, it was. Well, it's all the oceans and the trees. They're just a bit boring, aren't they? The war's falling in the rainbows. Oh my god, you're so boring. Well, don't worry, because questioner Paul Don has the following proposal. What's the feasibility of terraforming another planet, i.e. Mars? And if it's possible to do the same thing with something like the Moon? Yes, exactly. Dusty Grey, cold and atmosphereless. That's what I'm talking about. Well, that dream may one day be a reality, Adam, and it's called terraforming. Terraforming or Earth-shaping is the idea of transforming another world into one weekend live on. The concept has been around for a while, and the astronomer Carl Sagan was a big fan. He suggested dumping a billion metric tons of light absorbing material onto the polar caps of Mars, which would absorb enough sunlight to heat up Mars' cold surface and make it habitable. Would that work? Would Mars be a decent home for us? Good question. So I asked astrobiologist Dr. Louisa Preston from Birkbeck University. We are actually quite interested in moving to Mars, and the reason is, is it actually does remind us quite a lot of the Earth. It's got a similar size, it's got an axial tilt that's like ours, it's built of the same kind of materials. So it's quite reminiscent, plus it has water. But even though it is so like the Earth in so many ways, it's also an extremely harsh place to live. The water on Mars is frozen underneath the surface, so we don't have liquid water that life might need. Its atmosphere is very thin and completely unbreedable, it's 96% carbon dioxide. And it's exposed to extreme weather, lots of dust devils, which are 10 times the size of tornadoes on the Earth. So it's a rather hostile place to go and visit. Okay, so how do you go about transforming the atmosphere when I plan it then? Well, the main thing we would need to do on Mars so that we could live there, would we need to warm it up, we need to get a thicker atmosphere, and we need to get water. And basically we would recreate the greenhouse effect that we've sort of messed up on the Earth. We would then go and do that on Mars. We'd add a lot more CFCs, some methane ammonia, loads of different greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, thicken it up. And as soon as it gets thick enough, it'll raise the atmospheric pressure on the surface, which will then warm up the surface, and then liquid water will be able to flow. And then theoretically, once you've got liquid water, you can plant crops. So the oxygen would be in the atmosphere, and then we would be able to breathe. So this is potentially possible on Mars, but not on the moon. I think it's potentially possible on both, but Mars gives us more to work with. If we wanted to live on the moon, we would have to take basically everything we need with us to try and create some kind of environment for us to survive in. Whereas if we go to Mars, we at least have some natural materials, some water that we could play around with, and would hopefully help us out of it. Do you think we need to bear in mind that it took the best part of two billion years, and the birth of an entire domain of life to create a breathable atmosphere for us? That is true. It would take millennia on Mars, which is a slight drawback, I'll admit. Also, another small issue, no big deal, but any atmosphere you created would fly off into space. Right, also suboptimal, I would say. Why do we not have that problem on Earth? We've got a magnetic shield around the planet that helps to retain our atmosphere. Unfortunately, Mars lost its magnetic field about four billion years ago, so we'd have to keep pumping out more and more atmosphere just to replace the escaping gas. Yeah, this is sounding less and less plausible to me. So I propose we take it a bit closer to home, because Paul's question also included the idea of moon base. And I put this to Professor Danielle George from Manchester University. Danielle, you're an engineer. I'll give you a billion pounds grants. How do you go about building a moon base? I would say thank you very much for all of your money. And I think we'd send up a whole bunch of robotics first, I think, before we send anyone up moving to absolutely autonomous, so they can make decisions for themselves when they're up there, and start building almost like the pop-up environment, so that you could maybe start to build just a colony for a small amount of people, maybe ten people. Also, it would be ready for us, so the robots go first, and it would be ready for us to turn up like a pop-up tent. That would be the idea, yeah. Because then the robots can be up on the moon, they can be doing what they need to be doing, and then there's a whole bunch of other work that we need to do in terms of life support systems, etc. You need to start drilling into the moon to get the minerals to start looking at, is this feasible? So we can be working in parallel with the robots. I like that idea, a bit like going to a holiday home where they've prepped it for you, maybe put a chocolate on the pillow. It's a bit like glamping, do you think? Yeah, it's already set up for you when you get there. Yeah, so now I find this whole idea much more appealing. But the wine and the fridge, some tea bags. Adam, this isn't butlin's, I don't think you're taking this very seriously. But thankfully there are lots of proper grown-up scientists who are. So China, India, the US and Europe, all of them are researching the possibility of putting permanent bases on the moon or Mars. Yes, but instead of taking all the kit with us, as Daniel was talking about just then, one idea is to take 3D printers up and build our base from moon dust. I mean we already have 3D printers on the International Space Station, and they do use it to print out tools. Even better though, you can also use the natural geology of the planet instead. Because the moon, for instance, it's got these underground lava tubes. And these are like huge caverns that are big enough to fit an entire city. So if you're underground then, you're shielded from the harsh surface temperatures. However, there are issues beyond just the building that I think we need to consider here. Because if you're going to be part of a small team, setting up a new base on a new planet, then you have to make sure everyone is going to get along. Like the opposite of Big Brother? Yeah, yeah, so the anti-Big Brother. And there are some very real experiments going on to test this right now. Take high seas, for instance, where a crew of 6 people lived for a year as if they were on Mars. Is it to see how badly they're annoyed, either, because you've stopped an army after about 10 minutes? Yeah, here's Cyprian verse, so, the crew biologist. So the dome itself is a wide dome, 11 meters in diameter, and the slopes of the biggest volcano on Earth. We don't go outside without a spacesuit, you know, as if we were going to dive we did. We have to come into an airlock, wait for five minutes for simulating the compression and then go outside. So even when we outside, we don't feel the sun or the wind, because we are in those heavy spaces. And also it's very hot in there. And everything we touch is through gloves. I'm kind of clumsy anyway, but this would make the oven worse. The team emerged from their year of isolation on 28 August. And I speak to another crew member, Tristan Bassingthweight, who was the mission's space architect. Yes, that is actually a thing. And I asked him how Marshal Hawaii really is. The landscape does look like Mars with just flat rock and lava everywhere. And then the isolation, the delayed communications, the human experience of it, how you would deal with society is exactly the same. There's no trees, no people, no water, you're just by yourself in this sort of broken, shattered desert for a year. And then they try and understand how people respond to that. The main thing they were testing with you guys is the psychology, how you actually get on with a very small crew when you isolate it. Yeah, it's basically only looking at social and psychological aspects. So they want to know how you're going to react with a microsciety, how stressors are going to affect your mood, your work productivity. The entire thing is just trying to find out how many people you need, how diverse their backgrounds might need to be in order to make something like this actually plausible. Because if you send the wrong people and they can't get along, you can spend all the money in the world on a great base and an awesome ship. And it's still just going to be a mission failure. Okay, so you've been out since August the 28th. What was the experience like originally it's just sort of like a camp in trip. I mean, you're in a big dome. You've got all the food you need. You can't go outside, but you don't miss it at first. It really just sort of becomes a long weekend that never ever ends and you can't get out. You're always sort of in each other's way a little bit neareritating each other and the little things people do, you know, humming noises they make or always popping their fingers like absolutely starts to drive you crazy a little bit. And you might imagine tripping them on the stairs or something just, you know, to giggle at yourself, but you try not to actually indulge in any of the fantasies. But despite all of this, Tristan said he would sign up for a real mission to colonize Mars in a heartbeat. The dream job would be to have SpaceX call me up and ask me to help them design their Mars Colonial Transporter project and future Mars bases. That actual idea has about a hundred people going to Mars at a time on quite large ships. I mean, it could happen. You never know. And I guess the film The Marsha must have come out just after you went into isolation. That's with it's got Matt Damon playing an astronaut abandoned on Mars. Did you guys get to see that? Did it put you off? Oh no, like the book was great. I've done movie two. Once we actually managed to get it up there, stuff can go wrong, but ultimately, unless we give it a shot, nothing's ever going to change. And that's just not what we are as a people. I got to figure out a way for grown. Three years worth of food here. On a planet where nothing grows. Luckily. I'm a botanist. Mars will come to fear my botany powers. Are the power of botany? In the film The Marsha, Matt Damon grows potatoes in manure that he has collected from, hmm, well it's homemade. Let's put it that way. But would that really work? Here is astro-bogic Lewis, a Preston again. It's actually really realistic. We've done a lot of experiments where we've seen different types of vegetables and plants and even fruit that might be able to grow Martian soil. So the poo and potatoes thing on Mars would work? Yes, absolutely. It is very possible. But the problem on Mars right now is that the soil is just basically ground up rock. The type of rock it is, which is a basalt of volcanic rock, is very good for growing plants. But it needs that kind of organic component to it, which on Earth is filled by all the bacteria and organisms we have in the soil. So it needs some kind of fertilizer. So actually, poo would be the perfect, perfect option. So what do you think we're having first, then, the Moon or Mars? Both. It's actually really tricky because there are different camps. We are going back to the Moon and the idea of setting up research stations or even mining colonies on the Moon is there. But then obviously Mars, as I think maybe, is just a bit more attractive to people. So you've got Elon Musk and Mars One who are obviously trying to get to Mars first. So it might be both. So Dr. Rutherford, should we terraform Mars or build a Moon base? Well, Dr. Fry, I'm not entirely sure it's my decision. Not in luckily, because if it was, we'd all be going for your suits and going glamping on the Moon. And growing potatoes in a toilet. Okay. So we are agreed, then, you can colonize Mars and our stay here, just making sure everything is ticking over. So I'm off to Mars and you're staying at home. It seems like a fair division of law between you. Would you do it if you had the opportunity to do one way ticket? I don't think I would, you know. I like, you know, tea and telly. And you could have so for those two months, you could have a nice sofa. You could 3D print a nice sofa. The first thing that Tim Peak did when he got on the International Space Station, he said on our other programme inside science, he said, I had a cup of tea and a bacon sandwich and unpacked. Did he? That is literally what he said he did. Yeah, that's true. But you, I don't think I could do it. I can imagine the sort of adventure spirit in somebody who would want to do it. You would be remembered forever. Yeah, it would be pretty cool, wouldn't it? I think so. Proper pioneer. I hope we get to see it in our lifetime. I think that if we don't see our children do it, then our grandchildren will. Anyway, if you have any other curious cases that you would like us to investigate, about sending Adam into space or otherwise, please send them to curiouscasesatbbc.gov.uk And meanwhile, you can check out all sorts of other things to do with the programme on the BBC Future website, which is www.bvc.co.uk forward slash future. No, it's not. It's www.bvc.com slash future. I was so close. Anyway, we should finally thank you. I'll stop talking, will you have a heaven's sake? Just stop on that. Just stop that after that's the end.
