I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. Hello, Curios. We've got a slightly unusual Curios case this week. Do you think it's unusual at it? I mean, we are a science podcast. No, but it's specifically that we're doing chemistry this week. And we... Is my not what you would expect from the science podcast? Let me read out an email that came in from Mikey Stain's. He's 19 and comes from Barkshire in the UK. Actually, I'm going to read the PS first. The Curios cake off was my personal favourite and inspired me to bake a lemon drizzle loaf using the tips I picked up from the podcast. I now eat too much cake, but that is only a positive thing. To a limit, presumably. That is not the point of this. He also sends a photo and it does look excellent. It does do. Super delicious. Yes. The main email though, he says, I am a chemistry undergrad. And ever since starting my degree, I've noticed more and more that people seem to have a fear, or rather oddly, a hatred of chemistry. I love the complexity rules and randomness that this particular branch of science offers. It allows me to consider proteins in biological systems and then study the individual atoms and molecules and their quantum properties. That is pretty cool. You have to admit, well, indeed, my he, I do admit. Yeah, so he goes on quite to stat and this is why I think he's right, and I'm right, which is that he says that in chemistry world, which is one of the journals of chemists, an analysis showed that there were 952 science podcasts, only 3% of which were dedicated to chemistry compared to 32% for physics or biology. So on that, we are pushing back against the text and today's is really pure. Yeah, I mean, they're a must, though. Do you know what I mean? All very well-winging about the chemistry, not getting the line night. You get loads of maths. My key, getting the key. Do you know what I mean? Did you load a maths? We're always doing flipping maths. Only because I'm here and insist on it every day. Yes. That's exactly what I... Anyway, whatever. Actually, this episode is really nice. It's a really lovely story. It's got lots of really great elements to it. Hey. Who's with me? Yeah, it's got some really bad puns all the way through, in fact. And some really bad Russian accents by me. I particularly enjoyed that bit. So here we go. Here's some chemistry for you. We're searching for a solution to this chemical conundrum today. Philip Craven from Birmingham asks, Will the periodic table ever be complete? That's quite a timely question, because 2019 is the international year of the periodic table, marking 150 years since its invention. Now, you may recall those rows of letters and numbers on the wall in your chemistry lessons at school. It's the most iconic road map in science, the fundamental units of matter itself. But even after 150 years, we are still adding to it. Four brand new elements were given the official stamp of approval back in 2016. Nibonium, misgovium, ternicine and organicine. Why do you always give me the hard work? Because you do them so well. Anyway, we're taking time today to investigate exactly what it takes to discover a new element. Ah, well, that's elementary, Dr. Rutherford. Actually, Dr. Fry, it's pretty tricky. 13 series we've been waiting to make that joke. 13. Was it worth it? Not really. Anyway, let's start, during the age of wonder. Like many fellow alchemists in the 17th century, Henning Brand devoted his life in Germany to finding the philosopher's stone, the elusive substance that would transform anything into purest gold. He boiled his own urine into a thick syrup and distilled the residue to discover a substance that glowed with his own life force. Brand kept his discovery secret. Sadly, he didn't manage to produce gold, but named his new substance, Phosphorus. And you're in luck, sorry, because in doing so, Henning Brand became the first person to discover a new chemical element. After that, dozens of new elements followed from platinum to palladium until the 19th century when chemistry, as we know it, really took off. The basement down here in the Royal Institution of Great Britain is packed with antique electrometrics and elaborate Victorian lab equipment. And it was in this very building that Humphrey Davy developed a new way to discover elements as science writer Philip Ball told me. He had access to what was basically a battery in those days, it was called a Voltaic pile, which allowed him to do something called electrolysis, splitting familiar chemical compounds like table salt into their constituent elements, in this case sodium and chlorine. And Davy's original samples of sodium and chlorine are among the examples that are in this cabinet. So there's four glass containers, one looks like a mushroom, one looks like a sort of brandy glass, and that's them in them. That's the first time that those have been isolated chemically. As elements, yes. So what Davy did was to melt the table salt, pass an electric current through them with two electrodes, and at one electrode you get chlorine gas coming off, and at the other electrode you get metallic sodium, this very reactive metal forming. It's an odd thing, this is one of the strange things about chemistry, that sodium is this metal that almost explodes when you put it in water, it'll give you burns if you touch it. Chlorine is poison gas, it was used as poison gas in the first world war. You would never guess that there were elements like that in this substance. And yet when they combine together, they make this stuff that we put on our chips. Yeah, sorry if that bit is your chips. Yeah, they weren't explode, we promise. Now, the more elements discovered, the more these early chemists realized that some were similar. Sodium from the salty chips was a bit like potassium, calcium was similar to magnesium, a pattern was emerging, but what was it? On the 17th of February 1869, Russian chemist and inventor Demetri Mendelay of Bunked Off Work. He count on a work trip to a local cheese factory, and instead, on the back of his invitation, he spent the day scribbling down the symbols of all of the elements arranged into clusters. Sodium, potassium, prubidium, cesium. By that evening, Mendelay of had sketched out an inch, cut plan of all of the known elements, grouped into families with the same properties. Brilium, magnesium, zinc, cardium. And the periodic table was born. But the real genius of Mendelay of table wasn't what he put into it, but rather it was what he left out, the gaps with a key according to Philip Ball. Mendelay of was bold enough to recognize that if you were going to do this properly, if you were going to get all the elements in the right position, then there were gaps in his table, and he said, I predict that soon or later these gaps are going to be filled, we're going to discover new elements with the properties that fit this position in the table. It was only a few years after that that first of those gaps started to be filled. So people discovered, for example, new elements that was named gallium, which fitted one of the gaps. Gallium was an interesting one. It was discovered in 1872 by a French man called Le Coch. And he decided he would name it patriatically after his homeland, Gallia. But it also turns out that gallium is Latin for Coch or Coch. So some people suspect that he was actually doing a bit of personal self-advertising with that name. No, for EQs. Gallus-scalus, the domestic chicken. So as well as chemical elements named after chickens, then what else did the periodic table predict? Well, interestingly, after Le Coch published all his data on gallium, like its melting point and density, Mendelayev announced, Niet, Jorong. Le Coch was forced to check, and yes, Mendelayev was right. The power of prediction. That is when you know you are science incorrectly. Exactly. Using the periodic table, Mendelayev could correctly predict what the properties of gallium would be. Okay, so we all know that the table was a combination of letters, the symbols for the elements, and numbers. So sodium is number 11, chlorine is 17, and gallium is 31. But what do those numbers mean? Well, to figure it all out, I asked our go-to-atomic nuclear expert, Jim McElaylee. If you take a particular row, for example, and you look at what's called the atomic number, which increases one by one, that is the number of electrons that that particular element has, but also, more importantly, for me, as a nuclear physicist, the number of protons inside the nucleus. Every time you move from one element to the next, it has an additional proton. So the number of protons defines what element we're talking about. All the way from hydrogen with just one proton, all the way up to the much heavier elements with over a hundred protons. And it's at this far end of the periodic table, where new elements are produced today. If we think about the elements that exist naturally in nature, we talk about the 92 elements, although up to uranium. Well, we've known for many decades now and been able to make elements heavier than uranium, called the trans-uranic elements. Now, the reason these don't exist in nature is because they have a short half-life. They decay away into simpler elements too quickly. And it gets progressively harder to make heavier and heavier elements. There's a whole area, research called super-heavy elements, where they're studying these very, very large trans-uranic elements that don't last for very long at all. Right, so unlike in Humphrey Davies' time, it takes a lot more than a battery and some table salt to produce these new super-heavy elements. Dawn Shawnessy from the Lawrence Livermore National Lab was part of a team behind the latest discoveries. Moschovium, that's 115, Tennisine, which is 117, and organosum. No better than my attempts. Anyway, it's 118. Okay, then. We literally are only making one at a time because the probability of making these things is incredibly small, and it's very difficult to do. So instead of being able to do it chemically, we have to do it through particle acceleration. Really, what we're doing is just trying to throw two nuclei together, so they fuse together and make the new elements. Here's the recipe. You set your cyclotron to high. Prepare your two ingredients, which are a batch of precious and rare target material and some beams of calcium. Regular old calcium that you'd find in your bones and teeth, we take a special isotope of that, and we accelerate it in the cyclotron to fractionate the speed of light. Wizard all up to almost the speed of light, and if you're very lucky, your ingredients will stick together to form a new element. Watch out, it's highly radioactive, and falls apart instantly. And that's how we identify that we've made the new element. Because we only make one, we can't see it or weigh it. So we're really looking for the decay properties of that single nucleus, in the form of an electronic signal. And we can see at least a few of those with the same signature and an experiment. Then we pretty much convince ourselves that we've discovered something new. Easy peasy lemons, go easy. Yes, you just need a cyclotron and very precious rare target material. Even then, Dawn said they only create one nucleus every few months, and they could be so radioactive that they last for well under a millisecond. But if these super-heavy elements are so hard to make, and they stick around for only milliseconds, you might ask, well, what is the point? Are we just ticking boxes in the periodic table? Well, here's Jim Arclilie again. The hope is that making these super-heavy elements is more than just chemical stamp collecting. It's more than just the world record heaviest element possible. Because there are good reasons to believe that we might eventually reach a group of elements that will last for much longer. Maybe minutes, but maybe hours, years, thousands of years. So this is what is now referred to as the island of stability. If we can reach it, if we can make heavier and heavier elements, we may finally reach a point where what we're making don't just last for a blink of an eye. They will stick around. Then if they do, maybe we can start doing chemistry with them, rather than just nuclear physics and bashing them together and watching them fall apart, we might be able to actually use them for something. Okay, so we're aiming to reach the island of stability. Yes, and apparently that is where the magic numbers live. Well, three is the magic number. 126, actually, that's the next one. But if you plot how long elements stick around as they get bigger, you will find that there are these clusters of stable elements. Right, so this is the island of stability, which presumably had just passed the cliffs of insanity. Indeed, indeed they are. But when you extrapolate that pattern to heavier elements and you predict which atomic numbers might be stable, those are called the magic numbers. So as Jim told me, if we can produce elements with these magic numbers, and if they do stick around, then we could make new materials with properties we haven't even dreamt of yet. And the hunt has already started for element 119. And many chemists believe they will be able to make it even if it takes decades. Right, so let's get back to today's question. Where will this all end? Will the periodic table ever be complete? Well, we ask the experts. There's various ways that the periodic table could end. You might be able to make these new atoms, but it's impossible to ascribe particular chemical properties to them. In fact, there's some evidence just from theoretical calculations at the moment that the heaviest element we know, or Gannison, element 118, its chemical properties might get all a little bit blurry because its electron shells start to sort of merge together. So in some ways, even if we can carry on making elements, it may no longer be clear quite how they fit into the periodic table. I don't think it's going to go on indefinitely. I don't think we're going to get to element number 1000. I think that will be ridiculous. But there is an example of a nucleus that is far bigger than anything down at the quantum level. In fact, we call it a neutron star. Massive stars when they run out of their nuclear fuel and finish burning all their hydrogen helium, they stop shining, they implode. If they're not so big, if they're size of our sun, they won't do anything very interesting. But a star bigger than our sun could collapse under its own gravitational weight and form a neutron star. So this is essentially a giant nucleus held together, not by the nuclear force, but held together by gravity. It's so big, but it has the same density as an atomic nucleus. So we see how big can an atomic nucleus be while the size of London. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to whether the periodic table will ever be complete, can we say, case salt? Well, Dr. Rutherford, new super heavy radioactive elements continue to be produced using particle accelerators. But the larger these nuclei get, the harder they are to make and the faster they can disappear. Eventually, we could reach a limit where their chemical properties are so blurry, they no longer fit neatly into the periodic table. But the quest continues in the search for the magic numbers on the island of stability. So there you go. There's some great stories from the history of chemistry and some terrible Russian acting by me. Yeah, I quite like that. I think that it was so good that Curia might imagine that we went down to the BBC drama department and got someone who's a professional actor, but no, it was you. It was me, it was me. It was, I think it's up there with your horse. Yes, the slightly camp horse. Very proud of that. No. That was anodine, that not me, but yeah. Little bit of the oom. It's all about the back of the thread, that one. That's amazing. And a little bit of aroling. Love Russian accent, I think it's absolutely delicious. Say, cesium and sodium. Cesium. Or sodium. So good. As ever for the podcast listens for the Curia, it's we've got a little extra clip. And this was a brilliant little anecdote from Phil Ball that he told me in the Royal Institution. And do you remember in the last series we discussed the chemistry of hangovers? Yes. Well, it turns out that Humphrey Davy, who's the first professor of chemistry at the Royal Institution, and he was the guy that discovered loads of elements and loads of other stuff, he was also trying to find a cure for hangovers. This is what Phil Ball told me. Davy, hit on the notion that this gas that he'd been experimenting with called nitrous oxide might be a cure for hangovers. Now nitrous oxide is called laughing gas. In fact, it was Davy who called it that, because if you breathe it in, it makes you feel light-headed. And then anyway, he figured that maybe this would be a cure. So in order to study this, it said that he drunk an entire bottle of wine in eight minutes. And then he took some nitrous oxide to see what I would do. I think he probably only made his intoxication worse, certainly to judge from the notes he made in his notebook, which just get the letters just get bigger and bigger until it was filled the page. And it ends with him saying, I was sick. LAUGHTER Yes, I was sick. I just feel like you need to put that on a lot of your, the concluding marks. It's an important lesson to be able to do this proper science. You know when I was at school, my chemistry teacher was called Doctor What, right? She's amazing. The thing is though, the school that I went to was in a place called Where in Half-Gear, and I'm pretty sure that a husband was called Hugh. LAUGHTER Hugh What Where? Hugh What From Where? The son called Why. I technically had the same married name. I think she was Doctor What, and he was some other surname. I think one of my favourite jokes of all time, which I think, Steven Fry, originated... LAUGHTER You know, you know the peasants revolt. Yeah. So who led the peasants revolt? LAUGHTER I don't know. Which Tyler? See, the joke there is... What Tyler? Led the peasants. Yeah. Yes. LAUGHTER You know, on the other programme I do, Inside Tire. I counted for the number of complaints we get over the course of a year, and I ranked them. And so in reverse order, the complaints come in in the following volumes. Third is climate change, anger, or contesting things. The second is people starting their sentences, the words so. Oh, people hate that. They really hate that. You might know such if you listen more carefully to us in curious cases. What we do to get around it, because it's really hard, not to stop your sentences, so, as we go... Right. Right. So... OK, so... LAUGHTER Don't tell them that we do that. It's a clever trick, and now we've just told them. But the number, what the most frequent emails we get are complaints about grammar. And they're always not pedantic enough. LAUGHTER And so they always say, you know, they complain about used to the word, decimate meaning to... Which the peddense say means to kill one in 10 Roman soldiers. So it should be to reduce something by 10%. You never meant that in Roman times, and decimate in the earliest dictionaries in the 1700, was used to just say to wipe away. So the thing about peddense grammar, peddense, that's... They don't do the research. It's just not pedantic enough. LAUGHTER I don't know. OK. Talking about being pedantic, I actually need to be a bit of a peddense about something that I did in the last episode. So you may remember, our last episode was about hypnosis, in which Adam Rutherford was hypnotised by the amazing Ben Dali. LAUGHTER This is true. A brilliant moment I will never forget. But we have had an email in from Lars Badd from Denmark, who I think I imagine dabbles in these kind of superhuman superpowers himself. And he pointed out that in the sort of build-up when Ben Dali was gaining our trust, not everything that Ben Dali said was necessarily true. Very clever, Ben Dali, did a little trick on me at the beginning, in which I picked a card from an imaginary deck. So it was all part of the deception, yeah, started even earlier than we thought. It just makes me more impressed with that whole setup. It's extremely clever. We've... me specifically walked into every single one of its tricks. Me too. Me too. Basically, there were layers upon layers of deception. And we thought we were being skeptical, but perhaps not skeptical enough. So I think that's essentially all this. The card trick was actually a trick rather than... Yes, rather than him. But the hypnosis was real. Yeah. The hypnosis was definitely real. Yeah, well, it certainly was. And on that note, we've had a lot of comments, particularly on Twitter, that my contribution to that moment was to design a new Marvel superhero, who you may recall was a man, the size of a raccoon with a beaver's tail. I don't know who's a man, the size of a... What? A man, the size of a raccoon. He's tall. He's not a small raccoon. You mean a raccoon, the size of a man? Yes. He's like six foot. He straps. He's got a beaver's tail, and he's from Canada. Is he standing upright? Yes. Has he got pecs? Raccoons have pecs? Well, I mean, raccoons, so must Dutch and badgers tails. I need to revise my raccoon anatomy. Should we move on to Cure the Week? Yes, there we go. So, even though we promised not to start sentences with that word again, okay, so this email was sent in. I said so. I know. So, is when you put Needle and Cotton to hold bits of material together? Yes, it is. If you try and start sentence with the word, this email was sent in by, it often sounds very weird. Try it yourselves. Try it yourselves. Look, I'm not down so. It's called a discourse marker. It's like, I'm or I indicate that you're thinking about something. If people get so annoyed about it, then they're not listening to the rest of the sentence. No. Wait, which side are you coming down on Pro-Sew? What, anti-Sew? I'm a Pro-Sewer. Pro-Sew? You can't use it too much. You've got to mix it up. We think, I mean, look, this is what you have to think about very carefully when you're working really. Anyway, whatever. This email was sent in by Crystal Monkers from Seattle. Hello, doctors, fry and rutherford. As I was listening to your last episode, the mesmerist, I noticed a moment of potential mistranslation with regards to your Texas listeners' discussion of scones. I'm not sure. God not, this weekend. When is this ever going to take? I know. This is the last one. This is why they get in here the week. This is the one that draws the line under it. I am not sure they are aware of the discrepancies between the names of our bait goods. So she goes on to say, for instance, a cookie in the US is a biscuit in the UK. New that one? Yeah, that's fine. New that one? Yeah, new that one. Biscuits, yeah. A biscuit in the US is a scone in the UK. Did not know that. A biscuit in the US is a scone in the UK. Is it? A scone in the US is a rock cake in the UK. What? That's what they say here. I don't think that's true. What's a rock cake? We could do that. You know, on the test match special, they talk about cakes so much that people send them cakes. Let's keep doing this and people start sending us bait goods. Isn't a rock cake just like a hard fruit scone? I don't know what a rock cake is. Let me go on with the next sentence, which she does actually start with the word so. Crystal says, so it is true that Americans rarely eat a biscuit US scone UK with jam, unless you're in a restaurant that serves an English tea service never with clotted cream. Americans tend to pair their biscuits US scones UK with savoury meals such as biscuits and gravy topped with savoury sausage gravy or is it an accompaniment to fried chicken, topped with butter and honey? Top with butter and honey. What? As you'll listen to stated, Americans do tend to bake our scones US rock cakes UK with flavours such as orange can. I think this cannot be the same thing. This cannot be putting sausage gravy on a scone. Sounds absolutely disgusting. Well, she's very helpfully included a menu and she signs off with biscuits US scones UK and our very trendy and Seattle, which is very trendy yet. It's quite hip street Seattle. I have attached a menu of my favourite biscuit joint, the Seattle Biscuit Company. This is like, this is blowing my mind. So the menu includes things like the Willie Lee, eight dollars, which includes egg, bacon, cheese and housemaid jelly. But of course by jelly they mean jam, don't they? Because Americans say jam jelly. But why would you have a scone with jam and then bacon? That doesn't make any sense to me. I'm deeply upset by this. It cannot possibly be the same thing. How do you feel about this at the bottom of the Seattle Biscuit Company's menu? The Bishop Jim Earl Swilly, 25 bucks, which includes I don't know who Jim Earl Swilly was, but I presume he died of a heart attack. Four eggs, bacon, four eggs, bacon, ham, cheese, pickles, cheese grits, don't know what they are, and sausage gravy. I don't think sausage gravy is a thing. And then it says at the bottom, a potentially religious experience. I just can't imagine these flavours in my mind. They're offending me. I'm drawing a line under this, but possibly for the second time. Thank you, Crystal Monkers from Seattle. You are Curio of the Week. But anyone else who writes in about international variations on baked goods? Will be awesome. Unless they come with the baked goods. I think we're in Titans who plays that one exception. Yes, but no sausage gravy, because that's just... No, just roll. Anyway, next up, we have got a particularly special episode of Curious Cases. I know that we say that every time. I know that we get excited every time, but this time we really mean it. Because in the Curious Cases studio, we have got about 45 different instruments and the actual proper real musicians who composed and performed our theme tune for us, so not one to miss. I'm Greg Fertz and I'm hosting a new radio 4 podcast called The Best Things Since Sliced Bread. I'm on a bunk-busting mission to find out of the latest life-changing products and social media crazes really are all they're cracked up to be. Each week, I'm joined by a special guest and leading scientific experts to run a whole host of wonder products through the evidence mill. Blood-based-is-turned-cheese-enthusiast Alex James will come in to discuss the fizzy drink de jour, con butcher. I've got rapper, actor and podcast pro, scrubious pip looking at what we can do to beat the winter bugs. And we kick off with actress, writer and beauty blogger Rebecca Humphries and we turn our BDI evidence towards the beauty industry. Separating marketing hype from hard science is the best thing since Sliced Bread. Listen on the BBC Sounds app.
