I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of science. Science. I like it. MUSIC HAPPY CRITEMAS Happy Christmas, everyone. That was our Christmas horn thingies. We did have an extra one from Michelle. Give us a quick tut. Much better. See, that's why she is the professional in this triumvirate. You're quite right. Welcome to the Christmas podcast of Curious Cases, which may of course be slightly confusing if you're almost certainly not listening to this at Christmas time. Or in January, as I imagine, many of you will. But just cast your mind back to Christmas when everything was nice and everything was warm and cozy and you had your lovely family around you and no one had yet fallen out with each other and no one had yet been sick in their slippers. I'm just thinking too much, Sherry. That's where we want you to mentally be. Yes. A little insight into Dr. Fry's Christmas shenanigans there. Now, you may remember from the last podcast that Hannah has promised following some correspondence. She's promised to be nice to me throughout the programme. I maintain that from her. So let's see how that goes. It may not last beyond this episode. It may not even last this episode. But if we get to the end, I've got a present for you, Christmas. And I've got you a present as well. And speaking of Christmas presents, do have a look at our video on the radio for Wobbsite. On the radio for Wobbsite. On how to wrap presents using maths. You recognise that that hasn't come from me, really. I use the maths. You, let's say, didn't. I think that's probably accurate. And, well, I guess we can look at the results and see who's present is wrapped better. And because I'm being nice to you, I'm going to assume that it's yours. Oh, I feel honoured anyway. On with this week's podcast, which is all about taste. MUSIC Hello and welcome to a very tasty, curious case. Yes, this episode covers a perennial problem faced by families everywhere. It's the source of many a dinner time tantrum. Yeah, you really should learn to control yourself a bit better at it. No, it's Penny Young, who is young. She's 19 from Croid and she emailed curious cases at BBC.co.uk to ask, why don't children like vegetables? Yes, why indeed. Well, you had them, I've got lots of children, millions of them as far as I can tell. How do vegetables go down in your household? Well, like this. OK, Jay, what food do you really not like? Cabbage, parsnips, cooks, carrots. So vegetables, really? I like vegetables. Do you? What's your favourite supper? Hot dogs. My one is... nose and a chin. Noes and a chin. We don't really eat noses and chin, do you? Ha ha ha. Uh, jelly. What flavour, jelly? Chocolate jelly. Oh, I'd like chocolate jelly too. Maybe a bit more than the nose and a chin. I've got to be honest. Yeah, that was my three-year-old daughter. I didn't have to explain to her that chocolate wasn't a jelly flavour crushing her dreams yet again. But you've got a little baby girl. What's she like at eating? She's pretty good at she. She's liked everything we've given her so far to be honest. Certainly all the veg. Well, I've come back to me in about a year's time with that. Maybe I'm just a better parent. Anyway, I called on Jackie Blissett's professor of childhood eating behaviour at Comments University, and I asked her, why don't kids like veg? Vegetables fundamentally don't really want to be eaten. They contain often fairly bitter tastes, which we have evolved to associate with toxins. We're also predisposed to eat things that are perhaps higher in fat or sugar, because they're a good source of calories, and vegetables are neither of these. Is there an age when this starts? Because I have noticed that I've been quite successful at feeding broccoli to my nine-month-old child. But I'm sort of bracing myself for when she changes her mind. Is there an age where kids start changing their minds? Yes. What you notice with quite young babies is they're pretty willing to accept anything that a trusted adult is offering them. You might see some interesting facial expressions, but generally, they'll pretty much give it a go. But what you see through the toddler years, from around about 18 months onwards in many children, is a significant drop off in their willingness to try new foods. And we think that this has an evolutionary advantage. When you're a little bit more mobile, and you're potentially out of the watchful gaze of your caregiver more frequently, it makes perfect sense to have a mechanism that discourages you from trying something you haven't tried before, because it's high risk for some things in the environment are likely to be toxic. OK, so the idea here is that we might be particularly phobic about plant-based foods, because these, on average, are more likely in the wild to be toxic. Yeah, so we don't need to learn to like chocolate cake, but we do need to learn to like carrots and Brussels sprouts. Carrots, good, Brussels sprouts, bad. And a bit of arty. Even more intriguing, though, is the finding that the same food can taste completely different when we're kids. Children, we think, have a more intense taste experience than adults do. So when they are trying vegetables, for example, for the first time, then they are perceiving them as perhaps more bitter than adults would. How do you know this? Can you do experiments? Yeah, so you can do a number of different experiments that look at the threshold at which you can detect a variety of different tastes, but you can also get people to rate the intensity. So we can certainly show that children are able to taste, for example, salt in solution at a lower threshold than an adult might be able to. Mm. When I was about seven, the only thing I ate was beans on toast. And to this day, I maintained that that is one of the greatest culinary achievements of humankind. Strange they haven't invited you to be on Celebrity Master's set yet, but it is an interesting idea that kids might be fussy eaters because flavours taste stronger, though there are plenty of adults who are also fussy eaters too. And as adults, can we really be sure that we all have the same experience when it comes to eating food? Inside the lab at the DuPont Company in 1931, chemist Arthur Fox was pouring out some fine white powder with a puff of air blew a cloud of the crystals into the air. What followed changed the course of food science and human genetics forever, as Linda Bartoshoff from the University of Florida describes. A colleague of his was standing nearby and apparently inhaled it and said, whoa, that is really bitter. And Fox argued with him and said no, it isn't bitter at all. They had the wit to realize that something very interesting had happened and they carried the crystals around to their friends and found out that about, oh, 25 percent couldn't taste them and the rest found they were bitter. Fox and friends had inadvertently discovered that this specific taste was genetic. Some people have one or two versions of the PTC tasting gene, but if you have none, you just can't taste it at all. Now, Linda has been studying this phenomenon, but she faced a challenge. How do you measure a subjective experience like taste? What we came up with was to use some sensation that we didn't think was related to taste. For example, we often use loudness. So I might put earphones on someone and tell them to adjust the knob to make a sound as loud as a taste that I give them. And when we did that, we discovered that some people were apparently matching the taste to a much louder sound. And we started calling them super tasteers. That's very interesting. I'm trying to relate this to my own food preferences. I love super, super spicy food. I love my coffee to taste like death, but I have got no idea whether I'm a super taste or not. But you have very kindly sent us some testing strips through the post. So I've got one here. Just talk me through what I need to do. Okay, you should have an envelope with a blue sticker on it and a white piece of paper inside. Please taste the white paper. I once gave a lecture and discovered afterward that the audience had tasted the blue sticker. All right, I'm opening the envelope now. It's like the worst award ceremony in the world. It says a little disc of blotting paper about the size of two pens piece. Right, here we go. And on my tongue and I can taste nothing at all. It's a piece of paper. Yep. Well, you are like me. We make up a smaller percentage. About 25% of people are non-tasteers like we are. So a quarter of people can't taste this particular chemical that she uses. Yeah, we're called the non-tasteers. And then there are the medium tasteers who can taste it mildly. And the super tasteers who taste it strongly, presumably. Very good. They make up about 15% of people in the West, although interestingly, there are far more super tasteers in Asia. So what happens if you're a super tasteer then? Well, Linda describes being a super tasteer as living in a neon taste world. So bitter flavors are much more intense and chilies are much hotter. And sometimes puddings are just too sickly sweet. I don't think I'm a super tasteer then. Down full with the amount of chocolate that you eat, but look, there are hundreds of people here at the BBC. I am sure I can find a potential super tasteer somewhere amongst our radio four colleagues. Right then, we're better start my quest then, the today office. Apparently they are up for some experimentation. It's just coming up to 9 o'clock in the morning and I can see Sarah Montague and Nick Robinson are over in the studio. They're just about to come off air and I'm going to get them. Hello. Nick. Sarah. Hi. Well. Well, we need a clear palette for this. So these are the two experiments. I have two envelopes for you and we're trying to find a super tasteer. Right? Why do you already know if we're a super tasteer? Well, only if you've done this experiment before. Really? Because I would just presume I am not. Well, we can find out. So just take the bottom paper and as if you're a Catholic priest, place it on your own tongue. And it's about the same size actually as being church. And then just let it sink in. What are you getting? Any sensation? It's like the sour taste. Sour? Yes. Oh, really? Really awful. It's discat it. Can I get it? Yes, you can. What did you do that? Well, this is like a perfect demographic because I can't taste it at all. Right. And some people taste it subtly, which it sounds like what Nick is getting. And Sarah, you... I'm still the tasteer. Reaction. Well, both of you may be... Suddenly just put more stuff on my blotting go. No, it doesn't work like that. Certainly not a food taste. It's like warm. It's like oil with its disgusting. But some people describe it like on a noise scale. Super, super tasteers describe it like being in a jet engine. And that was kind of like what you just did. She's fitting it. Garganty and juiced to get over it. Now, I don't want it in my mouth. I want to get it out. It's a... You almost made Sarah Montague red. No, achievement unlocked. That's only the first stage of the test, though. A particular substance that Linda sent me, which is called prop, just stimulates one bitter receptor on the tongue. And we have 25 different bitter genes, which produce 25 different receptors. The secret to whether you're a super tasteer lies in taking a closer look at your tongue. Look. I don't really want to look at your tongue. It's okay. Well, anyone can try this at home because you're looking for what's known as fungi form papillais. According to Linda Bartoshock, all you need for this experiment is some blue food coloring and magnifying mirror. Swab blue food coloring on your tongue. Look in a magnifying mirror. You'll see either pink circles or light blue circles pop up. Those are fungi form papillais, named after what they resemble, button mushrooms. Taste buds are buried in the tissue of those fungi form papillais. Now, if you're a super tasteer, you have so many, they're just wall to wall and the whole front of your tongue. A person like me, a person like you, our tongues look polka dotted. We don't have as many. Yeah, I didn't think Sarah Montague's going to let you paint the head of the tongue blue to find out if she's the stupid tasteer. No, we shall see about that. No, we shall. Listeners, if you try this experiment, do send us any pictures of your blue papillais to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. I'm not convinced I want to see pictures of those either. But getting back to Penny Young's original question, why don't children like vegetables? Jackie Blissett told me that our individual taste experience changes as we get older. So even a super tasteer could over time learn to love sprouts. Maybe when we're eating our brussels sprouts in our Christmas dinner at three years old, it's a very unpleasant, strong sensory experience. By the time that we're in our 40s, we're probably detecting less bitterness on those sprouts because simply we're becoming less sensitive to taste. Is there a particular age where they stop having an aversion to try new things? Yes, for most children, once they hit six, seven, eight years of age, they start to become a little bit more willing to try new foods. So, Dr Rutherford, when it comes to why children don't like veg, can we say case-solved? Yes, Dr Fry. Children may well taste bitterness in vegetables more intensely than adults do. Which may have evolved to help us avoid toxic plants. About 15% of us are super tasteers who experience flavours more strongly. You can find out by painting your tongue blue and counting the dots. Right, there you go. So do send us in your pictures of your blue tongues. I'm going to make sure that Hannah looks at them and studies them. Yes, only because I'm being nice to you. Am I not smacking you down right there? I know. Now I realise just how often I do it. It's just just natural. It's natural to be. It's just the instinctive thing to do. I'm sorry. We'd like to definitely, especially thanks, Sarah Monze, to you, Nick Robinson from the Today programme, for being such. Very good sports. So here's your fact, here's your tasting fact based on the prop test. That chemical compound found in these types of super taste of test is part of a group called Thiocyonates, which contain nitrogen and carbon and sulfur. And these are also the elements that make brassicas taste grim, like cabbage and broccoli and brussels sprouts, of course. Brassels sprouts, of course. Christmas time. You know what they? I think that quite often brassas sprouts taste horrible because they're just cursed badly. You've never been for Christmas in our house. Are they taste like God's own green balls of joy? Now while we had some experts in childhood eating behaviour, we thought that we would just shamelessly ask them for parenting tips in how to get your own children to eat more vegetables. So here is Professor Jackie Blissett again. It really does depend on the age of the child. By far the best strategy is exposure to lots and lots of different, particularly the green vegetables through the weaning process in those early months. Then if your child is very fussy through the toddler years, you can use a couple of strategies that have been shown to work. In some cases it works really well if you take those foods completely out of a meal time context. So you might want to try something like messy play with different vegetables where the child is just touching them, smelling them, creating a picture out of them, whatever you want to do. Simply looking at foods, smelling foods, touching foods can be beneficial in encouraging children to try. For them to watch you eat it as much as anything else, you can use something like a sticker, something that the child wants to get that isn't putting, but they would like a little reward of some kind when they try something new. But most importantly is to take the pressure off. So don't worry too much about it. Don't make meal times into a battle and don't pressure your child to try new foods. You mentioned not using pudding as a reward. Is that not a good idea then? Yes, so they do very very quickly learn all of these rules that we have about eating. There's some really interesting data looking at children's understanding of this idea of getting a pudding for eating your vegetables, some nicely designed studies with hypothetical foods where you can ask three year olds would they like more of food A to get food B? And if you ask them is food A going to taste nice and it's food B going to taste nice? They know that food B is going to taste nice, but food A that they have to eat first is going to be horrible. So they've learned all of these social rules that we impose on them about eating from very very young. People have suggested using it in the reverse way. So for example, saying if you eat all of your apple pie you can have some broccoli, but fundamentally children are just less motivated by broccoli than they are. That would work on me. Exactly. Exactly. So children are not stupid. There's only so far we can take these kind of psychological techniques. Right, so some top parenting tips there including not using well vegetables in order to as a as a bribe for pudding. I like painting with vegetables. That's the one I'm going to love that. Some seriously top quality children's advice here. We should we should maybe do a parenting book make millions for I and Rutherford how to raise your children, but I put exactly the same question to one of our other experts is the geneticist Linda Bartoschock. You know what the best thing to do? Have another kid eat what you want your child to eat sitting at the same table. Peer effects are better than anything. The one thing I would be very careful about is ever making a kid eat something that really disgusts him. The problem is we're talking about genetic variation. Well, what if in your family you taste something you just love and your child finds it disgusting. You do not want to make your child have that experience. So I think you need to respect genetic variation, respect your child's decisions. And if you're really worried about intake, get yourself a computer program that will tell you what the micronutrients are in your kid's diet. I think you'll find that he's probably doing just fine. And the most important thing is to let him find his own way in the world. Well, I've got you on the line. We had another question from Turn and Batch from Norwich who's 10 years old. His question was why and how do different parts of your tongue detect different tastes? Now this is something that we do get taught at school, but we're not sure it's true. It is not true. It's totally bogus. How did that come about? Oh, it's a wild story. It started in Germany. A paper was published in 191 by a German gentleman named Henning who was working in the Lamb of Wilhelm Wunt who is probably the greatest and first physiological psychologist. Now he found small changes around the perimeter of the tongue in terms of sensitivity, but it was a really, really small change. The problem was that an American was touring German labs and the American was named Boring. He was a professor at Harvard and Boring could read German and he translated a number of these important German studies, but apparently he wasn't as good at the German as he thought because he translated it incorrectly. He somehow got the idea that small change around the edge of the tongue was all or none. And he published his version of this research in a book in the 1940s and that book influenced a great deal of American research. Boring was very highly regarded. People picked up this idea that sweet was tasted primarily on the front of the tongue, bitter on the back, sour and salty on the sides. And without any evidence, they started actually drawing a map that was labeled like this. So now we come to the modern era where we find tongue maps in lots of textbooks and it's completely false. If you actually put things on your tongue, you'll discover the map is wrong very quickly. Actually, I once asked a group of children and I was lecturing too and I asked them if they had done this experiment and they had and I said, did you get the answer in the book? And the kids said, no, we didn't. And I said, why do you think that was? And their answer was sobering. We must have done the experiment wrong. No, they were right. Their observations were correct and that was something that was very important to me. I started understanding all of this as a graduate student because I was actually reading some of these papers in the German. Back then, I had to pass a German exam for my PhD and I actually could read German. I read some of these early papers and I actually figured out what Boring did wrong in his 1940 book. But I actually didn't write it up until about 1993. It wasn't until I started seeing those tongue maps in textbooks that I got annoyed enough to write a couple papers about it. This is a very good example of why you shouldn't always believe the book. That was an excellent tongue myth busting by Linda right there. I know. We get taught this at school to this day, taught that you have different regions of the tongue for different tastes. Can visualize the diagram that people use in general. Simply not true. Now, we have another couple of items on the agenda. First up, the Curio of the Week. But this time, you're not going to hear me singing it. You're not going to hear Adam singing it because we have been sent in a jingle by a Curio and it goes like this. Isn't that incredible? I like that a lot. That was Thomas Cogley from Chassam in Kent. So he's riffing off the amazing, still I think the best audio that I've ever heard of anything ever, which is Hannah's coffee machine that plays the white stripes. Thomas, you are Curio of the Week. Of course he is. Of course he is. He's a long shot. Yes, you've done us proud there. So you are Curio of the Week. Thomas Cogley. Do send us your jingles and more importantly questions to CuriousCases at BBC.co.uk. Now we've come to the end of our Christmas agenda here. There's just one other item. Any other business. Yes. And I do have some other business. They've got a present for you. Oh, well I've got a present for you too. This is like Secret Santa, but of course there's any two of us. And we both bought each other a gift. Yes. So in many ways it's more like standard gift giving than Secret Santa isn't it? But that's fine. If you like, even being nice to you. Okay, right, hang on. Let's get them up on the table at the same time. Holy smokes. It's massive. It is, I know. You've used a photo of us dressed as detectives as your wrapping paper. I did particularly bad wrapping almost deliberately there. I think Christmas starts to fry. It's so bad. It's more the tape that's slightly offending me. Okay, so I've got a massive box here, which is absolutely perfectly wrapped. As I would expect from you, Dr. Fry. In fact, actually that reminds me. Don't forget to go and have a look at our wrapping video based on some rather nifty wrapping tricks that I wrote in a book with another mathematician called Thomas Olohr and Evans. You too, listeners, could wrap beautiful gifts. Well, I'm not sure about that because I tried to wrap as best as possible. I do have a copy of your book, but that's how mine came out. My box is very light. I know what you've got me. Well, wait a minute. Let's find out. I think I know when it is. Who's going first? Shall I go first? Okay, right. I've got excited. There's a laser on the top. Don't forget to remove it. The contents of this box will not shock you. Oh, what is it? It's getting to be part of the endless torture that I enjoy. It's not. I'm being nice to you. It's exciting. Save the bow. Save the bow for another Christmas present. The wrapping is so perfect. I almost don't want to okay and the box inside the box. Sorry, listeners, Anna's wrapped this so brilliantly, but I'm really struggling to open it. By the way, um, there's a good one. What is it? There's a lot of stuffing in here. I just wanted to make sure it was protected. Lots of bubble wrap and there's a tiny tiny little prison to the bottom. It's a purple spotty bag at inside. I almost scared. It's a sassy one. It's a sassy one. It's your own handy, anti-static electricity device. Oh, that's brilliant. I'm totally. Just anyone who walk along, you know, and you need to touch an escalator. Yeah, your trusty device, your trusty anti-static device. Exactly. And let that touch the escalator for you. I've saved you. This is a reference to our first Curio of the week, our astronomer who, out in Chile, conducted an experiment to stop himself or to test whether he could prevent static electricity shocks and he found the most effective way was indeed ASAT cinema. The problem is, I'm going to eat this. No, you can't. I'm going to. You can't because that's not the intended purpose of the gift. I'm deeply touched. I love the fact that it came in a box which was about four feet tall. So, well, thank you, Hannah. You're very kind. You're very good. Why don't you open your present, too? Note the wrapping, please. Okay, so this is wrapped with a picture of you and me dressed as detectives. It's been printed out on what I can only describe as cheap office paper. I couldn't get the colour bit of the printer to work, so it's just black and white. There's a lot of black on that, I say. I imagine you have emptied the toner cartridge. Which I appreciate. I like that you've done that. If it's yellow, it's not an idea. I was in trouble for that. The toner is low today. Sorry. Sorry about that. I was a bit worried about the scripts. Yeah, sorry about that. It's all the other. But it's good to find our days. Maybe four programmes that haven't got scripts currently. Melvin Bragg is going, come, let me see the text on his script. Yeah, so about that, Melvin. Now, you could describe your service paper's art is full. Yes, it's very nice. Just complimenting. You've got to put a lot on it. And then inside. Wait for it. You're so silly. Hang on. Hannah Racer book, which she just mentioned about 18 times, which is about the science of Christmas. Oh, yes. And so what Adam has done is he's... It's really good of my birth. I just thought it was a bit mathsy. So what he's done is he has taped over the front cover of the book. With various photographs, there's one on the front. He's changed it to read the indisputable existence of Molly, the mathematics of Molly. And then put a photo of my dog Molly on the front. And then he's changed it to be by Dr Adam Muthford and Dr Hannah Fry, but mostly by Michelle Martin, which we all know is factored accurate. There's lots of excellent illustrations in the book about things like how to wrap up presents and make borders and stuff, but I didn't really understand any of them. So I replaced them all with pictures of Hannah's dog Molly. And pictures of us. Oh, Adam is actually really sweet. He's gone through all of the photos that we take of each other doing stupid things. The contents page now reads chapter one, dogs, chapter two, more dogs, chapter three, dogs, chapter four, dogs, chapter five, it's dogs, chapter six, on to chapter 11, dogs. Math, blah, blah, blah numbers. He's written in the front. He's taken a photo. I'm not even sure how you got honked with that photo. Have you been hacking into my phone? No, I emailed Phil. Did you really? Yeah. Is that why you wanted his number? Yeah. You're such a little liar. He's not related to them. Goodness. He's got a photo of me with my brand new baby and my dog sitting on the sofa and labeled it with each of us has an arrow point, which is what I had saying genius. You know what? I've got to be honest, Adam. It's actually really touching present. I just got used to be so seen before a joke. It's delicious. I'm eating it right now. That's really like it. Yes, I win. I win Christmas. Yeah, I actually will be nice to you now from now on. Great. Everyone's a winner. I am actually using my Christmas present this afternoon. It's very delicious, but that is all for our Christmas pod car special. Happy Christmas, everyone. Happy Christmas, Kirie. See you next week. Bye. This is the BBC. If you like listening to the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry, then you will like you. Right, I've got to say will. Yeah, I thought it was a probabilistic universe. I mean, this case, it's certain that if you like that, then really you are going to like this much more. And this is the infinite monkey cage. All right, so wherever you are on the universe that you're listening to right now, just have a little search for it and then hit subscribe.
