Welcome to part three of series four of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. Which is equivalent to part two of nothing. This is like zero point two. See, you and Numbers, they sit very nicely together, but I'm already confused and the program hasn't even started yet. I know, but in this episode, this is the one we were getting to take them out. Oh my God, you were so overexcises in this one. I just... I don't just like it a lot. It was a little bit painful at times when you were just getting really into calculus. I can't help it. I can't help it. There was nothing I liked more in the world than a good juicy, delicious bit of calculus. Yeah, you were really, really excited and I had to concentrate really hard. You did. Well, but you know, we get to do a bunch of stuff all the time. There is some truth in that. So here we go. Part two about nothing. Welcome to part two of the hunt for nothing. Yes, we are halfway through nothing here, answering this fantastic question sent to us by Bill Keck. Does nothing exist? In the last episode, we looked deep into the cosmic wilderness and inside the invisible quantum vacuum. And we found that without nothing, we wouldn't have everything. But today, and I'm not going to lie, I am pretty excited by this. We are hunting for nothing in mathematics. Yeah, this doesn't bow well for me, does it? Nothing as in zero is what you mean. Now, you may not realise this at them as a biologist, but zero is absolutely fundamental to virtually all modern scientific and technological advancements, physics, finance, engineering, weather, forecasting. Yeah, okay. I'm sure you'll be putting me straight on that later. But first, as I've been discovering, looking back through history, zero's path to greatness was a very rocky one. The Babylonians, around 1800 BCE, were the first to create a positional number system and they used it to calculate the passage of the seasons. They wrote two symbols that looked a bit like triangles in various arrangements to represent one to 59. Much like we do with one to nine, but to differentiate between one and ten, we need a symbol that can work as a placeholder. And for us, it's zero. For them, it was two little dart symbols on their side. But it wasn't until two millennia later that zero as a number in its own right really started to come alive in mathematics, and it happened in India. It was the Indian mathematician Brahma Gupta who pioneered zero as a proper number in the seventh century. Here, the concept of nothing was already strongly embedded in culture, the path to Navarna evolved achieving enlightenment through emptiness. Matt Riser Alex Bellos told me about the documentary he made for BBC Radio 4 on his personal pilgrimage to see the birth of zero. I went to India to find the earliest zero, which we note when it's from because it's from a piece of text that's actually dated. So where is it in India? It's in Gualia and has this incredible thought on this big rock, and there's a little path that goes down the cliff and halfway down, they call it a temple, but basically it looks like a broom cupboard, with all respect. It's sort of holding the wall really. Okay, so this is the moment that you entered the temple then led by the curator of the local archaeology museum, Manuel Joseph. Shall we go in? Yes, definitely. Now, where is it? It is on this wall, and the inscription is, you can see it's all in Indian script, I don't know the standard, in the corner, I can see a circle, and that's the zero, is it? Yes, exactly, you have discovered it very correctly. It says 50 garlands have to be offered to the main deity here, Vishnu. Do you get many tourists looking for zero coming here? Recently there has been a surge in mathematical tourism, and we see many scholars interested trying to have a peep into this inscription. So tell me what did you see on the walls then? So it was not hieroglyphic, so it was kind of squiggles, and so you see this almost kind of very modern zero circle amongst all the texts, and you can think, what the heck is kind of exciting? It's like the future right there. Interestingly, why was the circle chosen? When I was a kid I used to think that the circle was chosen because it was like a hole, there's nothing there, but that's totally misunderstanding the point. It was actually chosen because it's the circles of heaven, it's the infinite circle of life. And every time, when you're writing down a telephone number or a price of something, and you write a zero, you're actually writing down something that has almost 2,000 years of kind of mystical symbolism. Who knew that maths was so hippie? And trippy too, because accepting zero into the gang of other numbers does throw up lots of logical conundrum, because it doesn't work in quite the same way as the rest of them. So if you add zero to another number, it doesn't change, if you multiply by zero, you get zero, and as for division by zero, infinity... Ah, well technically it's undefined, and also infinity isn't a number, it's a concept. Oh, alright, alright. Now, zero didn't catch on immediately, it began its life in India, and it spread to China and to the Middle East, where it was championed by the Islamic world, becoming part of the Arabic number system that we use today. But zero hit some pretty serious problems when it reached Europe. And it so happened that when it did was a time of Christian crusades against Arabs, so not a lot of love for Arab ideas. So the church was very resistant, and it took hundreds of years to be fully accepted. And you can see that in language. So the Arabic word for zero is Zepha, and this gives us the word in English, Cypher. This idea will kind of be done in secret, so something bad about it. But also in Portuguese, most obviously, sheephery, and sheephery means devil horns. In 1299, zero was banned in Florence, along with all Arabic numerals, because they encouraged fraud. I had an extra zero here and there, and it'd be a green light to rip people off. And even more worrying was the fact that zero ripped into the gateway to negative numbers, which promoted debt and illegal money laundering. And it wasn't until the 15th century that zero, along with all other Arabic numbers, was accepted. Yeah, that is staggeringly late, isn't it? If you think about it, Oxford University was already a few hundred years old before zero was widespread in Europe. Right, and by the 17th century, zero emerged triumphant as the basis of Cartesian coordinates invented by the French philosopher, Descartes. Now, speaking of mathematics, is it? Yes, we were. Because zero was at the heart of the biggest bust up in the history of mathematics between Isaac Newton and God-freeed Leibniz over which of them discovered one of the most important tools in science and maths today, calculus. Calculus. You know what? Calculus is actually one of my favourite things. I know even James. You've got really excited. I am genuinely excited. I want to share that joy with you, Adam, because to understand calculus properly, I think you need to integrate yourself fully with the subject. Integrate. That's a maths joke, isn't it? Math jokes are worse than dad jokes. I think you just done a riggy yourself out of this one. Yeah, okay. Fine. I call on fellow calculus lover, Dr. Jeffrey Hayes. He's a chemical and biological engineer at Montana State University. And he has promised to tell me what use calculus is. So we use calculus to predict what the weather is going to be next week, next year. We use calculus to predict stock prices going forward. It could be circuits on a computer chip. Anytime you're interested in change, calculus is the mathematics that describes that change. Okay, Jeff. My colleague, Hannah, she's a mathematician. Now, she's challenged me to understand calculus. This is me doing that. So please help me. Yeah. So we think of change in the regular world. We might think of how the temperature outside today is lower or higher than the temperature yesterday. But when we're talking about calculus, it's the mathematics of change at an instant in time. So maybe it's an hour or a minute or a second. And you just keep shrinking that time span down to nothing, down to zero, which is sort of where your question started at. Eventually, you will have how the temperature is changing right at this moment. Okay. Okay. Okay. I think I get it. So basic math says that you can't divide by zero, but we have to on a graph, we have to be able to get... Yeah. Yeah. Adam, concentrate. This stuff is hard. Okay. So there's taken an example of how fast you're driving your car and how that changes. I always drive within the speed limit. I'm sure you do, Adam. But okay, let's imagine that we drew a graph of one of your journeys showing how your speed is changing every time. Now, it doesn't matter how we're bullied, that line is, if you zoom in close enough to any part of that curve, it's going to look like a straight line. Okay. And the gradient of that line is my acceleration. Correct. Big tick. And that there is the fundamental idea of calculus. If you zoom in further and further until you are taking infinitesimally small chunks of your curve, chunks that are approaching zero size, then any kind of crazy ass relationship become nice, neat straight lines are very easy to deal with mathematically. But you can use calculus to describe how pretty much anything changes with respect to anything. So it could be how the number of sweets that we eat on a recording day changes over time or how your enjoyment of a studio session changes over time. Wow. How much maths is in the show. But the beauty of calculus, Adam, is that you can use it to look back into how things change in the past and forward to how they might change in the future. Okay. So that is the key idea. Jeff Hays told me this is all important because it means that calculus can be applied to more interesting stuff outside of maths, such as biology. So I do a lot of work in what might be called the biomedical engineering area. We have models that predict when you inhale particles with air, where do those particles get deposited in your lungs and in your airways? We've looked at models of heat transfer and tissues because one way you can kill cancer cells is by heating them up. So there's really a pretty broad spectrum of places where you can use calculus to understand biological principles, to understand medicine, and quite often we're trying to study things where the experiment is impossible or the experiment is unethical. So without the concept of zero, we wouldn't have calculus. And we wouldn't be able to forecast the future. In fact, you could say that the arrival of zero is one of the most important breakthroughs in the whole of mathematics. Here's Alex Bellos again. If we didn't have zero, we would be able to do lots of interesting geometry, but not much else because zero gives us the fantastic number system that is so versatile and accessible. And through that number system, it kind of gives us algebra, it gives us statistics. Really, you could say that the Renaissance was really sparked by the arrival of the number system, containing zero, and that system of using it as a number, you know, it's like a black and white world of arithmetic just became glorious and technical. So, Dr. Fry, in answer to Bill Kex question, does nothing exist? Can we say case salt? Well, in mathematics, nothing was ignored for centuries. And then when nothing became zero, it caused controversy and outrage. But today zero lies at the heart of modern mathematics and science. It allows us to navigate, to calculate, to forecast the future. And nothing can change there. All right, no more nothing, jokes, please start to do. Nothing could be further from the truth. Ah, I finished it. That was episode three of the curious case of Rutherford Fry, and brings us to the end of nothing. Yes, part two of the idea of nothing zero, absolutely not a zilch zero, but now I know it's like, I've found out words for nothing. It was fun though, wasn't it? Deadly squad. I think in four series, that was the most excited you've been. I had been excited before, but just it bubbled out this time. More excited explaining calculus than you were when you had a singing lesson? Weirdly, I felt a lot more of my comfort zone in this one. Yes, it was quite exciting. It was quite exciting. What, the singing lesson? Yes. Not for anyone in the room at the time. Well, anyway, that is the end of episode three. So two more to go in this season, and then we're back in the new year. Indeed. So send us your curious cases two. Curious cases at BBC.co.uk. I noticed how you handed that over to me. Because I can never, ever remember what the email address is. Curious cases at BBC.co.uk. Thank you very much. Goodbye.
