I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello, Curios. Oh, your voice sounds a bit croaky there, Adam. Ah, that's because I was smoking a pipe before we started today, which is a hot... You strike me as a sort of person who would be well at home with a pipe and a cr of ash. We do, but my friend Jack once considered reintroducing pipes into polite society. They didn't really catch on because smoking pipes is absolutely disgusting. Yeah, taste disgusting, smell disgusting. Looks great. Looks really good, really good for having arguments because you can just circulate with them. But really, really bad news if your job is predominantly as a radio presenter. Absolutely. Not very good for your voice. And that is what this episode of Curios Cases is all about. Hello, it's Curios Cases. And the question we're tackling is from Jonathan Crane in Long Island in New York. He asks, what happens to the human voice as we age? If I hear a voice on the radio, I can guess roughly how hard they are. But singers' voices seem to stay relatively unchanged as they age. Why is this? Okay, without looking this up listeners, how old do you think that we are? Be kind, send your answers and more importantly, questions to Curios Cases at BBC.co.uk. I think we might be tempting fake hair. This is a dangerous thing to get into. Now, we're going to get on to age and voice in a moment. But first off, what do we do when we talk? Well, normally I say something and then you make face and then you disagree with me. No, I mean what's actually happening inside our bodies. I went to visit the lab of neuroscientists and voice experts Sophie Scott to find out. Our voices actually start down at the rib cage and what we do at the rib cage is we squeeze our air out very gently when we use our voices. And what we're actually doing with that is we're providing a very controlled flow there at the voice box. And in the voice box, you're larynx. If you put your hand on your throat and go, you can feel something vibrating and that's your voice box vibrating. You've got these two bits of tissue that you bring together called the vocal chords. And they are literally just being vibrated back and forth by the air passing through. So it's a little bit higher up. Oh, like actually under your chin. There's a little bone called the hyoid. Hold that. Oh, yeah. Now that is just the start because here is an actual recording of what your voice sounds like from the inside at that point in the larynx. What's this? Badly tuned radio. That sounded like a B really struggling to get it words out. Because Zool was something. Okay, so there's clearly a lot happening between that B noise and this rather marvellous and much more melodious final product. Sing, sing, sing, sing, sing. You then shape that buzzy noise with the rest of your articulators and by the articulators, I mean your lips and your jaw and your tongue and the soft palate at the back of your throat. So what you end up with is it's almost like a musical instrument that continuously changes Okay, so that is how our voices made but the question was how does it change with age? Well, let's start at the very beginning. It's a very good place to start. Amazingly our voices are starting to reflect our identity from the moment of birth. Here's acoustic engineer Trevor Cox author of Now You're Talking, The Story of Human Conversation. Now what's this study comparing French and German newborns only a few days old, showing that they cry in a slightly different way and that mimics the different sort of lilt that you get in German and French. You could tell a German newborn from a French newborn by the way they cry. Yeah, their vocal system is pretty immature so they can't do very much but what they can do is change how hard they push the air out of the lungs. A simple cry, so it goes up in pitch and down in pitch and also goes up and down in level. When we're in the womb we are listening to our mother so from about the third trimester you're starting to hear your mother and her heartbeat and her voice. As children's bodies change and grow their vocal pipe elongates and their voices get deeper and they can produce a wider range of pitches. Until that is at least if you're a boy something dramatic happens. Here is the same young man speaking at ages 12, 13 and 14. There once was a young rat named Arthur who would never take the trouble to make up his mind. Whenever his friends asked him if he would like to go out with them he would answer I don't know. He's antelincer to him. No one will ever care for you if you carry on like this. You have no more mind than the blade of grass. Boys have this secondary descent of the larynx. It's called the breaking of the voice. You've got a movement down of the larynx so you can see a visible Adam's apple on most men and that's giving men an even larger instrument to make sound with and a longer pipe for their vocal tracks. One of the big changes that can affect your voices for women going through the menopause you start to undergo some of the changes that teenage boys go through. So women can find that the pitch of their voice deepens and that can mean that when they're singing it can be hard for them to hit the notes they used to be able to hit. Victoria Wood, I think very famously found that her song Let's Do It with these key changes that go up and up and up. She was having to start it lower because she couldn't hit physically hit those high notes anymore. It tends not to be as extreme as the effects that happen to boys in adolescence but it's a noticeable change. But then you do continue getting changes over the lifespan so you get health related things, mood related things will affect your voice. Social factors will affect your voice more life. You're a bit posh. You're a bit posh but also if you the more you like somebody the more you'll adjust your voice to be a bit like them. So the more a man likes a woman that he's talking to the more he'll raise the pitch of his voice to join his just to make everyone feel super awkward. Well I can't believe that at all. Do you remember your voice breaking? No not really. No I didn't go through that creaky phase where I was I was a chorister at school. Are you never mentioned? I have. I mentioned that before. People tell us about what always a chorister at school and I just went from being a treble to being an alto to being a tenor to being a bass. I think the table just vibrated. Anyway well the next major change that happens to our voices and that's both men and women comes later in our senior years. Now to demonstrate this we needed someone with a very familiar voice that we have recordings of for the whole of their life. Who better than the legend that is David Asimbra. Here he is age 90. Remember in a sing about a rather challenging time in the studio he had trying to control a python when he was 30. Helping me. Helping me control this python. Here's Mr. Lannorn from the reptile house in the London zoo. I'm pretending to be very accomplished. In front of Mr. Lannorn it was very charitable towards my attempts at trying to control this wretched snake. So I just show you or will you lose your hand. No I don't think. I'll be able to get asked if you think well I think we'll untie you later. Thank you very much. That is extraordinary. He's barely recognising what they how how come his voice has changed so much. Right well that's exactly what I asked acoustic engineer Trevor Cox. Well one of the changes that happens when you get older is your vocal folds no longer open and closed quite so well. They bow a bit which means air leaks out as you talk so you get this kind of breathy tone which actually now is quite trademarked atem brosner and it has several consequences. One of which is you can't talk in such long sentences because you run out of breath. So you tend to hear with older speakers that they have shorter sentences and they take more snatched breaths. Hello I'm Duncan Wisby and I am an actor and sort of voice impersonation type person. The radio 4 it's may know of me through things like dead ringers quite often know you get asked to do David Atembro and the classic way of doing Atembro is that kind of about the old 70s thing with with the grills and wonderful energy that he sort of had. I always say to people the way to get into David Atembro is you start off as dumbledore and then like you're chewing a sweet at the front of the mouth I'm pushing my lips out as if saying an ooo and then when you add the sadness of what he's talking about about the you know how these creatures are very rare and could become extinct at any moment and they still got that push of the old energy and this mouth has changed and there's something that's going on there inside the mouth which is a classic thing you do when you're doing an aged character is to do that sort of thing you know you're playing somebody very very old you lads up sort of wobbling. There's also singing really I mean I can't say that I've noticed the difference in say Tom Jones is singing voice is it this is the same truth for how people sing? I think probably yeah I think about Paul McCartney as well as he's got those jowls now as well to his voice is very different and what's your old movies like you know hard days night I always think of him as like a clarinet and John Lennon's the kind of bassoon character like that and he's got that sort of nasal thing. Most McCartney knows old things he's got a little flutty sort of character but now with the age he's sort of really kind of jowled down and obviously it's slower and when you listen to him it's singing as well now he sounds kind of like an old lady you see well he can't quite hit the high notes as well because that gets more difficult and this natural little vibrato tends to come in I mean when you listen to old ladies in church or whatever and McCus now got the wobbles so when he gets up for those high notes when he tries to do his ooze it doesn't go oo oh anymore it goes oo oo oo oo because it's a bit of a struggle for him. I'm sure that's exactly how he'd like to be described as a wobbly jowled. A wobbly old lady. Do you do you think your own singing voice has changed over the years? Yeah definitely I can't get anywhere near the notes I used to be able to get when I was back in my 30s yeah it gets tired very very quickly. Well I think that's my new favourite interview ever Duncan Wisby and his many alterie goes. Many alterie goes. Now our questioner Jonathan Crane thinks that it's much harder to guess the age of singers versus speakers so is this true? I asked neuroscientists Sophie Scott. Well there's interesting differences between speaking and singing to start with because you're basically producing a different kind of control breathing and therefore things that affect the larynx could affect the singing voice as much as the speaking voice. I suppose the only thing that's a slight spanner in the works is that the singing voices you normally hear that we're kind of exposed to culturally are in a trained singer. So unlike speaking voices which most of the speaking voices you hear are not from someone who has been trained to use their voice to you. So I think the thing that can make it harder with singers is that they're singing in a particular way that they have learned to do and they're practice to do and they may have a good reason to not want that to change very much. Maybe Madonna doesn't really want to sing and not sound like Madonna. It means that you're not comparing necessarily like with like with a singing voice and a spoken voice. Now Jonathan also said he could guess people's ages from their speaking voice. Exactly. Well studies show that in general people are quite bad at getting the age of adult voices and they can be out by up to 30 years. In actual fact this is pretty good news especially for us radio types as Trevor Cox explains. I think one thing you can be cheered by especially as your radio presenter is actually your voice stays you know readily to fully young for quite a long age. I'm sitting here I'm in my young 50s and I'm you know I've got gray hairs and I've got wrinkles yet my voice is not that different to when I was 20. An actual vocal aging really only obviously happens when you get maybe into your symptoms. So one of the funny things about voices people who hear a healthy voice assume you're younger than you really are. So Dr. Rutherford when it comes to how our voices change can we say quesol? Yes Dr. Fry our voices deepen during childhood as our vocal track lengthens until the larynx drops in men during teenage years. Making them all a bit croaky. Then in late years everyone's vocal folds become a bit floppy. But the good news is that our voice stays sounding youthful far longer than the rest of our body. Lots of accents and vocal noises going on in that episode. Do you feel self-conscious about your voice while recording that? Absolutely yeah all the way through. This is one bit during Sophie Scott's interview where I say oh really? Listening at five. Wow very deep. I know there's so many so many bits referring to like pitch and tone and all the way through it the next line I was thinking do I have to emulate that style of a content project? Yes a continuity in our own salt and radio for. You know what they say I actually had an extra track with Sophie about how you can tell someone's age from their voice but not necessarily because of what's going on inside their bodies but more because how trends of different words change over time. Other things that can of course affect your voice in your age or we pick up stuff about other people's voices and things we like in voices throughout our lives and that can date us quite precisely. I mean an obvious example is pronunciation. Throughout my lifetime we've gone through a complete disappearance of people saying things like diss you and diss you even. So when I was a kid that would have been the normal way of saying those words and now you know I would have been the generation that stopped saying that I was saying issue and tissue and that marks me if I was still saying issue and tissue that marks you of a certain age because that's kind of when you've learned how to say those words and it's dynamic and changing all the time so this is there are already huge differences in London English. The dip song I is really going out of London people say lack back rather than I like your bike. I can't even do it well that's like a lack of a excuse. If that sticks if that spreads out more generally people who do and don't do that will be another marker of age. You've got these sort of really big shifting patterns of how language is used. Even the Queen has shown a shift in her vowels as these societal things go on so they're always going on they're kind of where where I out with that will sort of mark our age as well. I'm so glad that so if you said that thing about about the i sound because my son Jake has been on the program in the vegetables episode. Londoner. He says like he's telling me. I love that. I really like the sound that it makes. I love that. I know that some people are a bit snobby about the sort of new London sound but I really like it. I like it. I really like it. You know how we don't like it. You know when I get him to say I then he goes I and then they say now say 95 and he's 95. Terrible impression of Londoner. I know. I do think actually say I grew up in on the board of three and a half cheer and ethics and when I was younger I had like much more you know like Tim's Valley voice whatever and when I first came to Radio 4 and the first program I did at Radio 4 was with Michelle Martin. It was about the maths of terrorism and I'd be reading the script and I'd be like right so police show they thought like whatever. You never did that. That is a lie. I will not have Michelle Michelle is good name besmirks. And then Michelle was like no you were so police and terrorism she's going at my friend's thing is untrue. I'm standing by Michelle and this one. The real truth is somewhere between what she's claiming and what I'm claiming. So when so if we was talking there I was thinking about some of the ways that I have a case you've been picked up on for pronouncing them in a slightly weird way and one of them is the large room where you sit on chairs in front of a stage where actors act. What's that what's that building called? A theatre. A theatre. What? No it is. That's all my life I've called it a theatre and I believe other people that act are actually wrong. Yeah I got complaints in actually this happened more than once. People who hunted me down on the internet found my email address and sent me angry emails because I said kilometer instead of killing me. I've had them too maybe the same people. We also actually did an episode quite recently on what's the sharpest object. So in this episode we had a good friend of the programme Mark Midovnik who was talking about how he was stabbed as a teenager, a render story you know and weirdly ended up becoming a material scientist off the back of it thinking about steel. We also had obsidian the volcanic rock that can chop ahead of a horse. Were you terrified were you going to get all sorts of complaints from this programme? Yeah. I don't know the way up through the BBC we did have a complaint for that programme. And what was it? Actually we had a bit of a Twitter Archimunk that someone who was very angry with me saying, bruschetta. When I said bruschetta. Oh should you? I was adam. I said Michelle's just corrected us in areas. It was actually I said. Why is she assumed it was me because you're the posh one? Oh rude. But what did I say? Bruschetta isn't it bruschetta? Everyone says bruschetta. And what should it be? Bruschetta. Bruschetta. But that's like saying you know people who refer to the capital as France as Paris. You're right. So actually we're very careful with the BBC but we try and pronounce everything correctly. We even have a pronunciation unit that you can call up if you're unsure of how something should be pronounced. My favourite game whenever that situation arises is to call them up and ask for the pronunciation unit. That's just mean. You know they get that four times a day from annoying presenters. It makes me laugh every day. There was one other when I was making a program a few years ago and obviously I have spent a lot of my life saying the word molecule. That just comes up a lot. Sounds right. Sounds correct. Right. Molecule. We use some archive footage of a very famous Nobel Prize winning scientist called Morris Wilkins who was the recipient of the third recipient of the Nobel Prize the year that Crick and Watson got it for his role. Also Rosemar Franklin who was dead at this stage. The role in the discovery of the structure of DNA. One of the most famous scientific discoveries of all time. Anyway we found this archive footage of Morris Wilkins talking about the DNA thing. And he should know how it's pronounced. And he pronounced it. Molecule. No way. And I'd never heard him say. I thought you were like the professor of. You are Mr. Molecule. Molecule biology. I couldn't stop laughing about it forever. Ever since yeah Molecule. Love it. Either of your eye get to be very senior professorial types. I think we should make a choice to choose one word which is absolutely inherent to our field of expertise and study and deliberately mispronounce it all the way through. Can I start putting it a leg rubra? Yeah. Or genomes. I've just had my genome sequence. Genomes. Yeah. Have you ever heard of genomes sounds rude? Genomes maybe. Now that we get confusing with. Anyway one of the things we talked about with Trevor Cox was how to keep our our vocal cords in trim well exercise because these are you know we are vocal athletes. This is our job. Yes you really look like an athlete. Thanks. With your pot of coffee. And Emma pipe which I'm putting down now. Not our pipes in the studio these days. But we in the program we mentioned that there would be more top tips on keeping our vocal cords in trim. Indeed we did. Do you have top tips for us? And here is Trevor Cox with them. Okay now you've spent your career as an academic as a researcher thinking about voices and sounds and those sorts of things. I've got a moderately successful career speaking down microphones on the radio. What should we both be doing to make sure our voices stay youthful and vibrant and you know honey like tones. Well you could do that maybe. Yeah I mean there are vocal exercises. I mean you can get exercises that stretch out your voice. So to give you an example you can sing a tone the word no and go from the highest to the lowest pitch or roughly your highest and lowest pitch and that will go from a very long set of vocal files to a shorter length and that will kind of exercise it. I'll give it a go but I must warn you I've got slight croak in my voice so this is probably give up halfway but I'll do my best. And you meant that's just very funny to hear that. Well you meant to do it without having a break and of course towards the bottom my voice give up because I've got a bit of a croak. So you can do those but this is a bit like going to the gym isn't it? I don't know if you go to the gym but I find it boring. So it's much better to find something keeps your voice healthy and it's fun as well and a really good example that is going to acquire. So singing regularly you practice good respiration you could practice or control of the voice and it's fun as well as being you kind of good for your voice and that can be really helpful. I do it now. If I just have to start start as high as I can and then keep going for as long as I can. Yeah it's the it's the no oh sound and it really you've tried to get. Right bearing in mind that I was a chorister at school. No! My shell is making me laugh! Well when can I stop? That was pathetic. I mean I thought I did badly with my croak but that was really what was I meant to be doing? Well the idea was you meant to be doing that continuously without a break so it's hard for you to do that because you could have precise controls you gradually change the pitch so it's kind of stretching and trying to make you learn to control your vocal folds better. What like we're not going to talk about the fact that you've heard during that interview. Sorry it just seemed like the right thing to do at the time. This is what I mean about like all the way through this whole program every time anyone says anything you start thinking about your voice and it becomes completely artificially it just seems right at the end of that sentence I should probably maybe maybe just crrr. Trevor and I having both done this and you can see why Michelle cut this from the main program we decided that we would ask you to do it just to complete the trio the holy trinity. They were noisy have to make that. They were it is no. No. No. As in grassy no and you have to go from as high as you possibly can to as low as you possibly can and you face and that. Did you tell you were yawning halfway through it? I was doing that whale speak from the beginning Nemo. I get it. My door is the first. Yeah. That's the second time Nemo's made it onto the curious cases. It is. It is. It is. Did I mention that I was a chorister in that interview again? No you know what one day I'd loved to hear that story really would but now it's time for Curie of the Week. Okay. It's Curie of the Week. Email that came in from LRGF from London. Okay. And it goes like this. During Easter break we travelled to Antwerp in Belgium and paid a visit to Rubenshoes which is nicely pronounced. Thank you. Which is the Rubenhouse and that's home to the Flemish painter Peter Paul Rubens. I noticed that item 20 in the museum is none other than a beautiful 17th century Curio cabinet. Curio case. I love it. It says you make a Curio case if you like. So he's got some photos. So it looks like I guess a sort of like an upright piano but with all of the panels kind of open and inside there's all sorts of little paintings one of which he's taken a larger photo for us. Yes. I can't. There's a little cheeky bottom poking out of the chair up. Yeah. There's a chair up. And there's a chap. I mean we should probably know who this is. Hogthead. I didn't really. He's presenting a hogthead to a woman. The chap could be you there Adam. As I often do present the woman who picks to to topless women. She I mean I like to think I wear more clothes than that to work. That's it. That's my baseline you know aim. Any art historian Curio is out there. If you'd like to write in and tell us what this picture is actually about because we're not that good at art history. But I can tell you something though the Curio cabinet. So this is this is Rubens and it's very elaborate and decorated and artistic. But it was a thing that many artists actually had and Rembrandt and the Rembrandt helped. Is this from your own knowledge or has Michelle slip juice and secret notes that I haven't said? I did a program about Rembrandt. I did a series. Probably we see four on the history of art and Rembrandt who is the greatest painter who's ever drawn breath. Don't write in that's a fact. But he collected all sorts of gubbins that he subsequently painted and they included things like you know dried crocodiles and bits and bobs so he could use them to sketch but also and we know this because when he sold his house in the 1640s I want to say there was an inventory list by the insurers and it included several bits of human body. Well he painted human body. He was really into anatomical art. Like as in dead human body. Yeah like a tattoo artist. No that'd be even more weird. Rembrandt did two of the great anatomical artworks the first in the 1630s called the anatomy lesson of dog to Nikolai's top so he was he was a great anatomical artist. Way to get the dead bodies from. The butchers I think I might be making this up now. That's the one now. You are Curio of the Week. And that's all from us this week. See you next week. This is the BBC. Hi there I'm Claudia Hammond. Now the wonderful Hannah and Adam always have plenty of evidence in their shows while they answer some of life's mysteries. If this is the kind of thing you like then you might also like all in the mind the BBC podcast I present. Every week we cover psychology, mental health and neuroscience. So if you've ever wondered how we humans think and feel and behave and why we sometimes do some strange things then all in the mind is the podcast for you.
