Welcome to the final episode in the current series of curious cases. And today, we investigate the curious case of the strongest substance. Which is a bit of an old question, because it's just... Seems like it's easy. It seems easy. Does it? It seems really simple to me. What is the strongest substance to complete the question? Because otherwise, the strongest substance is just a statement, really. What was the end of the question then? What is it? I think that was just it. What is the strongest substance? However, this is the episode where you didn't subject me to any torturous things which you often do over the previous series. I was kind to you. That's right. In this occasion. More than kind. You handed me a hammer and asked me to smash some stuff up in the studio. I thought I'd get the chance to smash some stuff up as well. But weirdly, it didn't come around to my turn. As soon as you had the hammer. It was one of the more robust scientific investigations. I think you'd go. I think we should be proud of ourselves as scientists and human beings. And of course, hammers and radio and smashing stuff up. That's classic radio. But I think we really nailed it. Oh, that's a good one. Hello. Yeah, there's one dad, Jack, too far. Should we get on with the show? Yeah. Here's the curious case of the strongest substance. Hello, why is there a hammer on the table? Oh, we'll become clear, my curious friend. We're going to need it to answer the last question in our current series, sent in by François Mischel. Here you go. Take a look. OK, the question is, what is the strongest substance in the universe? An easy one this week, because it's diamonds, obviously. No, no, no, no, no, no, it's a spider's web. Are you living in a dream world? Spider's web stronger than diamonds? Or I don't know, iron. Yeah, definitely is. Well, let's settle this very quickly then by asking material scientists and broadcast their Professor Mark Madobnik. Well, that sounds like a very straightforward question, because you know, it must be a fact, surely, but it's actually a really complex question to answer. Because strength isn't just a thing, it's actually many things. So if someone said to me, who's the fastest person in the world? Well, it's not easy to answer, because you might say it's the person who runs the 100-meter Olympic Final fastest. And I would be would say, oh, no, no, no, it's the 800 meters, because that's much harder to raise. Or you might say it's the person who runs the marathon, the fastest. Who is the fastest? And of course, that's the same with materials and strength. Strength is many different things. And so we define it in many different ways, and many different materials are stronger than others, depending on what race you're talking about. OK, so how do we decide? Well, I have got a tray right here with various bits that we're going to use. With some delicious treats on it, there's some biscuits, and one of the tofies. Yep. Although I think perhaps I might be off biscuits and tofies after the middle-aged spread programme. I think that's probably wise. But don't worry, we're not going to be eating these. We are going to be smashing them up with a hammer. Outstanding. So first, I'd rather consider this biscuit. Now biscuits are strong in the sense that they are surprisingly stiff, which stops them from bending when they're being transported. However, they are also quite weak. Please deploy the hammer. You want me to smash the biscuit with that hammer? This is top quality science, my friends. There you go. One smashed biscuit. I hope they're completely smashed. Now, unlike those ginger biscuits, which didn't last particularly long, these tofies are quite tough. Please smash the toffee with a hammer. Toffee smashing, commence. So the toffee there, it's deforming a little bit, stretching a little bit, but it's not shattering. So these are tough, but they're still pretty weak. Yeah, this is an unbelievably scientific demonstration here. It's especially good for a radio, I think. And the conclusion, you wouldn't want to make a bridge out of toffee. Do you know, I think we need to ask some real experts. We're on two idiots with a hammer. Surprisingly, yes. I call another witness, actual engineer, Professor Daniel George, from Manchester University. What does she think is the strongest thing in the universe? Well, as someone who comes from the University of Manchester, I probably should choose graphene, because... ..because it's all from, yeah. ..and it is the strongest material ever measured, depending on how you decide on strength. But it's thin. It's very thin. And a single atom layer of carbon, in order to break through a thin sheet of graphene, you would need an elephant balanced on a pencil. Yeah, that is pretty tough. Anyone have done that experiment? Not that I know of. Let's get the grant form out. I think that's an experiment that needs to take place. I'd go for the pencil, to be honest, if the toughest material in that equation is... Well, I'm not going to go for graphene. Yeah. So I'm going to go for something that graphene has helped to become stronger, and that's carbine. Ooh. Yeah, so that is a... ..one-dimensional form of carbon. So it's a chain of single atoms, and it's got three times the stiffness of diamond, and it's 200 times stronger than steel. A one-dimensional material? Yeah, a carbine is a string of single carbon atoms, like an necklace, and they're all bonded together, but the measurements are so small, that it's virtually, effectively, one-dimensional. OK, I think we need to test this one out with the hammer. Right. Unfortunately, carbine is currently filed under the category called theoretical material. So it doesn't exist? No, no, not really. The problem is that it's so reactive that the atoms automatically tangle up with each other, and they react, and so you have to cover the string of carbine, a bit like a sword, you have to stick it inside a tube of another material, like graphene, so it can't exist by itself, at least at the moment. Well, then I think it's disqualified, and my phrase, call me picky. That fair enough. And if we are choosing the strongest substance in the world, the problem with materials like graphene is that their strength comes from their perfection. Their faultless, sure, on an atomic scale, but as you try and scale them up, you encounter a big problem, entropy. So entropy is a kind of measure of the disorder of a system. It's easy with your bedroom, right? So the bedroom is either tidy, with everything in its place, or it's messy, and the messy is more disordered, and it has a higher entropy. That's also true of materials. If you think of materials as made of atoms, and they all have their place in the material, if you're talking about perfection, like graphene, every atom has to be exactly in place to get the strength you want, and if you have a defect, it's going to impact the strength. And of course, as you make something bigger, actually entropy makes that material more disordered, and it puts more defects into it, and you cannot get away from this. If you try and make something big that's perfect, you're always going to fail. A bit like trying to get 100 meter sprinter to run them out in the fastest. So a graphene building, it wouldn't be ideal in, for example, an earthquake. No, probably not. Also, graphene, very brittle, so it's definitely disqualified. Now, you can solve this problem, of course, with brittle substances by wrapping them up in other materials to make them stronger, and that, of course, is where carbon fiber comes in. Very light, but very strong, and used in everything from bicycles to form in a one-carze. OK, now I've got something which is pretty much the exact opposite of brittle, and it's extremely practical, too. Go on. Well, a few years ago, I went to a farm in Utah to meet some very special goats. Are you trying to tell me that goats are the strongest substance in the universe? No, no, no, no. Not normal goats. These are very special goats. They are spider goats. They've been genetically engineered to produce spider silk in their milk. Here's the moment that biologists, Professor Randy Lewis, introduced me to his kids. Hey, freckles. Come here. Freckles. Over here. Right. So we have names for all the goats. He's actually one of the very original goats that was created. Can we actually milk them now? Yeah, we can. Pudding and sweetie. We can knock those, and you can see the milk. Freckles putting in sweetie despite the goats. Yes, yes. Just a totally regular farm. That's right. OK, how does that work? Right, so they took the gene for drag line silk from a golden orb weaver spider, and they inserted that gene into the goat's DNA very precisely so that when the goat lactates, it also produces a whole bunch of spider silk, and you can just spool the spider silk out of the milk. Very impressive, but why do you have to do it in a goat? Why can't you just farm the spiders in the first place? That is a very good question. I called Randy for a catch-up on the latest spider goat news, and he asked him just that. Spiders have two serious personality defects. The first is their territorial, and the second is their cannibalistic. So when you try to farm them, you put a lot together, they literally start killing each other and eating each other until everybody has enough space. In this program, we're talking about what the strongest substance in the world is. And the reason we're talking to you is because I think it might be spider silk. Because it is a contender. I think it is. Because of its combination of both strength and flexibility, so it's about 10 times stronger than steel, I think compared to other things that people are arguing on the strongest, I think the spider silk probably has the widest number of use as possible. What are you actually doing with the silk once it's been made? So one of the amazing things about spider silk, it's incredibly biocompatible. It really can be implanted in the body and shows absolutely no inflammation, no antibody reaction. Simple things like making liquid bandages. The advantage is that it'll stretch with the skin and stay attached. So you can actually conceive of having a machine that actually would sort of spin the material right onto your skin. We can include antibiotics and things like that in there to prevent infection. And nobody would actually end up touching your skin. It would just basically come flying literally like through the year and attached to your skin. Pretty impressive. I know, it's flexible and it's tough. And as Randy just said, there are tons of medical applications. Even the ancient Greeks knew this and they use spider webs to patch out wounds on the battlefield. I'm telling you, spider silk is absolutely amazing. All right, spider boy, calm down. Because I have here a spider's web from our producers shed. Always have a go with the hammer, there you go. Right, OK. I think I understand the point here. Right, so now stuck to my finger. Yes. Yes, well, apart from being covered in biscuit, now it hasn't exactly retained its structure. Not really. I think your spider silk is out. OK, so you've had your spider silk. Now what about my diamonds? Because they are incredibly hard. But does that mean that they're strong? Here is Maturio's King, Martin Medovnik. Hardness is another one of these specialist sports in the Olympics, right? It's like shop putting, if you like. It's a type of strength hardness. And it's the resistance of scratching. Everything that's hard doesn't also resist, let's say, being pulled apart. There's sort of two different types of strength. So you know this with your teacup, right? A teacup is actually very hard. It's very hard to scratch a teacup. But you drop it on the floor and it smatters easily. If you had a diamond key to put into a lock and you twisted it. Bit of a disaster. An expensive disaster. Taking all of this into account, then, size, brittleness, hardness. What for you is the strongest material? I will go for steel. Because steel is essentially the lifeblood of our whole society. Everything in this studio, everything you're wearing is either made of steel or made with steel tools. And it's because it has this wonderful combination of being very, very strong indeed. But it's an all-rounder. It's hard and it's tough. And I think we go back to the Olympics analogy. You might say that someone like Jessica Ennis is a far more impressive athlete because she's a heptathally. She's able to perform strength over many different types in the javelin shot put, high jump, long jump. And so the heptathally kind of materials are the ones that you actually see around you. Carbon fiber is one of them. It just does many different things, well enough, not the best, but well enough. And usually to compromise to do that, you can't be the best in anyone category. You've got to be an all-rounder. So I think we've got a winner then. It was the steel hammer all along. Dr. Rutherford, in answer to the question, what is the strongest substance in the universe? Can we say case solve? Well, it does depend on what you mean by strength. Some materials like diamond are hard, but brittle. And others like graphene are greater at a small scale, but not very useful for building anything big. But the world is full of useful materials that are really good all-rounders, like carbon fiber and steel. Adam, it is a bit of a mess in here now. There's biscuits and toffee and spiders webs everywhere. And it's your turn to clean up. Bye. So that was the curious case of the strongest substance. Don't forget to send us your everyday science mysteries to curiouscasesatbbs.co.uk. And that is the final episode in this series, series three, but fear not. Yeah, because only around the corner is series four, which will be ready. And this year. Is it this year? Yeah. In fact, we're going to show... Oh, excellent producer. Chipton. The person with all the facts. The actual facts and the actual research. What's the answer, please? It's December. It's December. So we'll be back on air in December. We even know some of the questions already, don't we? We don't know any of the questions already. We've got the short questions. OK. We're still looking for some questions, though, for the new series. Yes. So definitely, if you have anything that has been playing on your mind, any scientific mystery, any everyday conundrum that you would like us to investigate, I particularly like the ones in which I get to send Adam out to be tortured. Oh, are there going to be some more of them? Are they... I mean, we can hope so. Well, what have I done so far? I've been fainted. I did the traffic jam. Waxed. Oh, the waxing... You know what? In that waxing program, they did what you did warn me at the very end that it was going to grow back thicker and more quickly. Has it? Yep. Excellent. To the extent that, at the end of the summer, when I'd spent quite a lot of time with my top-off swimming and stuff like that, I thought, I looked in the mirror and, I can't save my shoulder, I thought... Thorne Wolverine. Yeah, it's Nick and he's Nick. I thought I was Wolverine. I actually thought the first thought I went to my mind was, oh, maybe I'll go and get it waxed again. What have you done? Created a monster. You've created a monster. I know. I think this is what girls have to do all the time. I know. Shall we do the important stuff? Okay. So, don't forget to send us your curious cases, curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. You can also check out lots of extra things about the show on the BBC Future website. And there's lots of articles and there's videos with previous curious cases. And I think all that remains for us to do is to thank our excellent outstanding, super awesome producer Michelle, who sent it to my left. Thank you very much, Michelle. Say hello, appreciate it. Hello. She does all the work. We just come in and muck around. We do a lot of mucking around. And she has to sort of knock us into she... I think we do get the best sign of this bargain. I'll be honest. Thanks Michelle. Sorry. Okay, bye, sorry.
