Welcome to episode N of the EMPTH series of Cures Cases. We've stopped counting. Hannah has a detailed spreadsheet but unfortunately it's an Excel so it got corrupted and we don't have to read it. Happens to the best of us. Yes it does. But this one has been a particularly fun episode to record. They're all fun to record but this is really gross. This is definitely one you'll see at towards the end of the episode we get to do something quite fun and this is definitely one of those occasions where I zoomed out from myself, looked down at my life and wondered how it could possibly have come to this. You'll see, enjoy. I'm Dr Adam Rutherford and I'm Dr Hannah Fry and you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. We are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. This week's curious case comes with a severe warning. Yes today we, well actually mainly Adam, are going to play you a lot of sounds that have been specifically designed to upset you. Yes and if you don't like the sound of that we suggest averting your ears. But don't blame us this is not our fault. This is all because so many of you have written in to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk with questions about horrible noises. There was thinly aged 10 from avidine sure who wanted to know why do some people I think he means specifically his dad find noises like fork scraping a plate so terrible. And then there was Evelyn who's 16 from Northern Ireland who asked why does so many of us get freaked out by nails on a chalkboard and yet some people are unaffected. And this question from James Thomas who asked what is the loudest food to eat another horrible noise. Yes there were so many more of these questions and we are hearing you loud and clear. Lots of you are curious about terrible noises. Right so today Hannah I've dug into the BBC sound box to come up with some examples of horrible noises. Of horrible noises you better strap in because this isn't going to be fun at all. What's your worst? Let's give me you start off with some generic scraping. Generic scraping what's something like how's that? It has a deeply unpleasant. Don't worry about. Oh what else have you got? How about an old favourite the dentist drill? Oh I felt that one in my skull. Yeah no don't like that one. Don't like that one. All right stop. What about some foxes making blurb at night? Yeah I mean no one's having any fun there, rather. Probably even the foxes. Then to compliment the foxes how about some really bad violin playing of some burlios? Okay. That's painful. You know there was once when I went around to dinner at my friend's house and brought my dog with me after dinner. The eight year old daughter was learning the violin at the time she decided to give us an office dinner rendition of the piece of sweetness. Yeah but she was terrible. It sounded like that basically. I mean she was eight. No one can play the violin at eight but the really interesting thing was the whole way through her performance my dog started howling. It was like something out of a cartoon but I had to desperately apologise and pretend that it definitely wasn't happening. I'll be around for dinner soon. No that's not. There are little angels performance just for you. You spurned it on radio for me. I feel awful. Well anyway okay let's definitely agree that there are some noises that humans and cock-a-boo dogs find deeply upsetting but what is actually going on with these sounds? Well let's call on our go-to audio-phonic mystro Trevor Cox who is a professor of acoustic engineering at Sulfur University and he started off by reminding us that there is so much more to hate than just scraping noises. You could have disgusting sounds like listening to someone chomping on an apple or eating with their mouth open. You have things like the dentist drug. Going in for the cure and causing some pain. We could just have those annoying sounds the day. Maybe the aircraft flying overhead and waking up at night. I mean none of those sound particularly pleasant. Is this a universal thing? Do we all agree on what horrible sounds are? Well we agree on some of them. I mean the thing about hearing is how we respond to them is partly about what we learn most of what we learn about hearing during our life is our experiences. So there can be odd responses that vary between individuals but there are some which are fairly constant. So if you take something like the dentist drill that is fairly universally unpleasant because usually at some point in a dentist you have some pain experiences but there's others which might be very particular to the person. We had one one on the experiment we ran where we had people having arguments and the response to that varied a lot. I mean might depend on your home circumstances whether you find that exciting like an EastEnders or as you're devastating sound. Sprague is not going to be much fun for you is it? No. And then noise is the bottom you add them? Not really. Almost none of them have a particular resonance with me. I mean the teeth drilling a little bit. In fact sort of any sort of teeth scraping. Sometimes when I grind my teeth I don't like it much. What are your worst ones? I mean I've got quite a few of them. This may surprise you. I don't like knives. Like this? I don't like that. I don't like that at all. I'm sorry this is a very long clip as well. You know when you watch a film and the knife noises start before you even see them on screen. I just leave the room at that point I don't like that at all. So what is that the sort of dryness the mechanicalness of it? No I think it's the association. I think it's that I know that it's going to result in something gory. The other one I really don't like is dry things rubbing together so my husband does something where he just plays his toes like this. Like just a flex on next feature. And then with that sort of a sock on top when you can hear it that really honestly it makes me extremely angry. What a bit like this. Quite a lot like that. I'm not a rational person around noises like that. That just doesn't bother me in the slightest. So there is sort of categories there that we can put the different disgusting noises into. So there's the scraping like the fork on the plates or the blackboard or your husband's toes. Blackboards don't bother me though. I mean I think if you're a mathematician you grow up with blackboards. Surrounded by blackboards. If you were frightened of blackboards you really wouldn't get blackboard. Yeah no I understand well then there's a disgusting so things like coughing or eating. Sniffing noises or eating or bottom based noises. And then there's sort of fearful or distressing one so the sound of a fight or baby's crying. Ah baby's yeah no actually baby's crying is definitely what. Yeah. That's a lot of baby's crying. That's a very young baby as well. You know when you are a new mum when you hear baby cry did you know that your boobs hurt? Do you know this? I've never experienced it. No obviously. So it's because the sound triggers a release of oxytocin in your body which is one of the hormones that's required for let down of milk. So yeah you have like a physical reaction to it. I think it would be best if I didn't comment on that at all. It didn't happen to me once for any of my kids. It's very interesting though because it's not necessarily distressing itself as the reaction associated with the sound that is causing a physiological stimulation in your head. And actually you know what Trevor says that that idea of association that is at the heart of why we don't like a lot of noises. So something like a disgust reaction. So those sounds of people chomping on food. At an early age we teach our babies to find some things disgusting because we want them to avoid disease. So things involving bodily fluids on being sick for example we have this natural reaction to keep away from because we might pick up a disease and we train our babies to respond in that kind of way. And so that is definitely a learned reaction but a rather important one for survival. What about sounds that maybe don't have that same association with? I'm thinking about fingernails down a blackboard or a fork over a plate that kind of sound. What is it about those that marks them out as so distinctively unappealing? Yeah I think the scraping sounds are really interesting because it's not so obvious why we should find fingernails down the blackboard unpleasant. Particularly because there's hardly any blackboards around anymore. But my experience is it varies from person to person. Some people have horrendously strong reaction to it and really have to leave the room. I personally I could listen to it all day. I don't want to but I don't have a strong reaction. What we find when we look at these scraping sounds is they have similarities in their audio signature to what you get when someone screams. So if you have a distress call and you really let it rip there's a couple of features to that sound. First what goes very high pitched and the other thing is you get what's called roughness and that's when you because your vocal folds no longer moving in a nice simple way and they have this sort of ahhh kind of quality coming down the line at you. So you get this high pitch and you get this roughness going on and actually those features also appear in fingernails down the blackboard. It's a high pitch sound but also your fingernails because they judge as they go down the blackboard they have this kind of temporal modulation this kind of roughness which is a bit similar to a scream. So I think the best explanation is our brains are kind of mistaking them in the way for a distress okay so that makes sense different people have different associations it makes sense that not all sounds will bother everyone equally but there must be some sounds that we all agree are sort of universally horrible. Yeah good question so of course being their very good scientist there years Trevor Cox ran an experiment to see if there was a universally hated sound a sound that everyone agrees is absolutely horrendous and I need to give you a warning here because there is a sound that everyone hates and it's really not very nice. It's a really old experiment actually it goes back 15 years maybe so it was really early days of the internet when we started having computers arriving that had sound cards on up until that point when you bought a computer unless you're a real audio nerd your computer didn't actually play sound which seems remarkable nowadays doesn't it and it struck me that we had a chance to do a mass experiment where people could listen to sounds and respond to them at home I mean normally when we run these experiments we do them in very controlled conditions in the laboratory but it's very hard to reach large audiences that way and so what we did was we put up on the internet we put 34 different sounds a huge variety you know it could be horrible screaming animals through to babies crying through to fingernails scraping and people went on and rated them and people really enjoyed this experiment we had hundreds of thousands of people take part listening to really horrible sounds and telling us what they thought about them so it was very popular then people actively wanted to listen to these horrendous sounds well I think the other advantage we have we had novelty on our side I think these sorts of experiments all over the place now where's it in the sort of earlier days of the internet there was less distractions like you know YouTube wasn't big in those days so we had slight advantage in reaching the audience but I mean the only problem we had with getting publicity was at the end of it the worst sound was a disgusting sound it was someone being sick and the recording was so unpleasant that a lot of media refused to play it so we didn't get a lot published on our results I have a feeling that I'll produce something they're brave enough to play it just as a warning for anyone listening yeah don't play the whole thing and it's a really good mock-up by a sound artist Sarah and it involves throwing baked beans in a bucket and an actor really doing it and the reason that one came top I think is because discussed it is a universal reaction we all have it we're trained to have it as a young baby to try and avoid us getting disease from things and so everyone responds to that badly whereas with fingernails scraping people were quite surprised that didn't come top but my experience is it varies from person to person some people have a horrendously strong reaction to it and really when you play it have to leave the room and then others are kind of much more neutral I personally I could listen to it all day I don't want to but I don't have a strong reaction and so when you do an average across a population it tends to come down the top 10 a bit we've talked about experience and association and obviously vomiting is an experience and association which has no positive connotations or memories but I'm wondering could we make this worse by adding images do pictures make a difference oh you want to make that experience more intense than it already was okay okay you know what though it does actually make a difference this is something that Trevor and his team have looked into if you show someone a picture of a dentist drill over a blackboard before you play them the sound then it does indeed make it a more unpleasant experience for them do we actually know what's going on to make us hate these noises so much well it all comes down to what's happening in your brain it comes down to the meagre alert that area of the brain that seems to process things like fear has seemed to be involved in this and you see two strong responses to these unpleasant sounds ones in the auditory cortex where we just generally process sound and ones in the amygdala and so that's the reason I think this kind of fingernails down the blackboard scraping sound is probably something to do with a distress call fear response because of the amygdala being involved so if you take a normal screen you know it doesn't have the sort of kind of full roughness but when you go ah and you get a real rough sound going in your throat with the vocal folds are moving in a more complicated way that's much more light to light up the amygdala and much more light to give you a strong fear response. Trevor Cox, amazing acoustic scientist really lousy screamer I have to confess I've been waiting for this moment this moment for quite a while why because we're doing this horror films just because of some loose connection to screams is absolutely because horrid noises are a key part of all scary movies this one has to be my absolute favorite you all know me know how I earn a living I'll catch this bird for you but ain't gonna be easy bad fish that was jaws right thinking I was down the blackboard of course yes grizzled old shark bait quint in Spielberg's classic probably the best film ever made you've never seen it have you nope do you know blood in it and it's got sharks in it okay all right what about this probably the most famous scream in cinema history that was scream queen Janet Lee and Hitchcock psycho obviously also probably the best film ever made you haven't seen that one either no knives blood it's not for me Adam what is it about that particular scream though here's Trevor Cox yeah we did an experiment on screams again another online experiment yeah we found female screams those very high-pitched screams were more unpleasant I that's partly due to the fact that they scream at a higher frequency and therefore it hits where the ear is most sensitive so because we have an ear canal so we have a tube connecting from the outside of the ear to the ear drum we have a resonance it means the ear is particularly sensitive around 3000 hertz and that is kind of the frequency you hear if you really as a female really go for a scream I mean overall then your take is that we are just hardwired to hear these as distress calls and react accordingly yeah I probably wouldn't use a word hardwired because that's often assumed that you're born with this response actually it's much more likely to be a learnt response because most of our response to sound and most of our processing of sound is something we learn actually from the third trimester we started getting hearing and we're starting to work out the sounds around us and obviously then you do even more as you get into a child so I think most of these are learnt responses but they're really important learnt responses now look I can do this all day I've got a whole bank of gross sounds right at my fingertips here but for some people this issue goes well beyond a sort of joyful taunt of their co-presenter yes for some people everything from the hum of the fridge to the squeak of an old door can arouse a range of powerful negative emotions so this phenomenon is known as mesophonia and it's a real condition that can be incredibly debilitating this is a Lana Tansley Hancock who told us when it started happening for her I was about eight years old and I remember sitting across the dinner table for my brother and hearing him eat just a normal dinner and there was something about the way he was breathing through his nose that started making me feel quite enraged and it progressively got worse over the years spreading to different noises he would make different people usually like other relatives making similar sounds to the degree where by the time I was 12 or 13 I was eating dinners on my own in my bedroom away from the family mesophonia is not a condition that is widely studied in fact only a tiny number of scientists do and Tim Griffiths professor of cognitive neurology at Newcastle University is one of them mesophonia is a condition where people have an extreme emotional reaction to sounds which don't produce the same reaction in everyone chewing sucking and breathing sounds and sometimes sounds like clicking of pens or tapping on keyboards the reaction that is produced is really quite characteristic people develop a sort of flight or flight response and might develop a feeling of extreme anxiety and most commonly extreme anger which is like boiling anger that they can't control. So the emotions that I certainly feel when I'm triggered is this sudden uncontrollable feeling of rage it's difficult to describe because it's definitely a fight or flight response it brings about this sort of anxiety reaction so your heart rate increases even talking about it and describing it I almost start like experiencing it at the same time so your heart rate increases and you want to get away from the situation you will get the urge to lash out and hurt the person making the sound although I've never done that but it's the sudden intensity and the inability to control that reaction I think is what makes it quite a distinct condition for people and something that most people who hear about it don't fully appreciate that there's nothing you can do to stop the reaction from happening it just happens your body just automatically starts reacting in that way and then it takes a while for your brain to catch up and to calm you down and try and rationalise what's happening. It is pretty common when I first started seeing patients in my clinic who came along with it I thought it might be a bit of a rarity but the more you look and more you find actually and the survey data are quite compelling it generally occurs first of all the early teenage years so it's young adults and above it's commoner in women and these are people who are perfectly normally functioning members of society otherwise we don't find any clear evidence for any associated psychiatric disorders like depression anxiety or obsessive-compulsive disorder and there's no little clear evidence for any associated neurological problems or hearing problems. Okay so in a typical brain it's the amygdala and the auditory cortex that are reacting when we hear a sound we don't like what's happening in someone's brain when they have mesophonia. In subjects who have mesophonia there's a different type of processing that occurs and we have particularly implicated another part of the brain which is called the insula which is buried within a fold of the brain next to the auditory cortex at the side of the brain and what we've shown is that in subjects who have mesophonia we can demonstrate activity in this part of the brain that increases as a function of the strength of their mesophonic reaction in other words this fight-or-flight response. The other thing that we've been focusing on more recently is activity in the motor cortex of the brain that actually is related to chewing and sucking and facial movements that can produce the reaction so motor cortex that means the cortex is connected to the muscles that produce those movements. This is rather interesting suggesting that the mechanism for mesophonia might be one in which the sound produces a form of mimicry in the motor structures that usually produce those sounds and that is what causes the unpleasantness. So in short there is a really quite complex network of areas in subjects with mesophonia that become active during the mesophonia experience that beyond the traditional street cortex which interact with each other. Okay let me make sure I understand this then so if chewing happens to trigger your mesophonia then just hearing someone chewing can fire out the part of the brain that controls your own chewing muscles. Yeah and Tim thinks it's the extra brain stimulation that looping in the insular with the motor cortex that triggers the adrenal response. Which makes you angry. Which makes you angry makes you angry. Well I mean I do definitely get angry with certain sounds but this sounds like it's something beyond that. It sounds like something different. Yes it's not just a minor irritation and it looks like it's physiological because Tim's FMRI studies are starting to show they could well be subtle structural differences in the way the brain responds to sounds in people with severe mesophonia. We've done studies looking beyond the activity in networks of areas associated with this condition to actually looking at connections between areas and what we found is the connections between the motor areas and the auditory cortex are stronger in subjects with mesophonia compared to other subjects. So I think that provides evidence for a different type of wiring in those subjects compared to what might be called the normal population which I say without that being a sort of pejorative term about subjects with mesophonia. Non-sufferers might be tempted to find this all a bit funny when you're a teenager a brother or sister doing anything might be intensely annoying to you but severe cases can be really serious and life-altering. I grew up on the out of white so I travel home from university on the train and in any normal sort of hour and a half to our train journey I'd be changing carriages every 15-20 minutes of someone I've been to Baguette Crisps or started reading a newspaper I'd have to go up and leave the carriage so it was often worse in situations where I knew I couldn't get off the train so I just had to keep moving so one train journey I think I moved 13 times and realised that that wasn't normal I obviously stopped going to the cinema because it's quite a stressful environment with all the popcorn and yeah it started reducing them out of places so I would go with people or having to make sure you had the television on in the background whenever we were all eating and there's something I still have to do now. Is there anything that you can do about it? Well Alana said that she had some respite when she broke her leg and the pain took her mind off it. Yeah I wouldn't say that was exactly a cure. No not recommended but she uses noise-canceling headphones a lot so that's playing white noise to mask any sounds but these are all coping mechanisms rather than treatments. Well I guess at least having all your meetings on video call you can at least meet people now. Yes there is that again though not much of a long-term solution is what Tim Griffiths had to say on treatments. I think it's really difficult to treat. People have tried cognitive behavior therapy to try and help people to overcome the symptoms. Alana hasn't found the bats helped and in my experience it's only a minority of people who are helped by that and I guess it's not surprising if you look at the situations in which the responses are produced you know sitting down having dinner very difficult to come up with a form of sort of graded exposure that might allow you to get over that. In terms of drug treatments then they might be appropriate for some of the symptoms that are secondary to the condition particularly low mood and anxiety but there's no evidence that they affect any of the primary symptoms themselves. There are a number of groups who have become interested in thinking about brain treatments for this condition techniques like applying small electric currents over the surface of the skull investigating whether that might affect the symptoms. Yeah that really does not sound like it's fun at all. No no it doesn't. I think there's a control element to this too even for people without something as serious as me's a phonia so it's a bit like when you're in train and you can hear someone having a phone conversation so you only hear one half of it and you don't know when it's going to end so you have no control over the intense irritation that that comes with. So it's the idea of control that's the key thing here is it? Yeah I think so you know similar to leaky headphones also on public transport when you can hear in the background. And you can't stop it. You just want to do it so please get better headphones. Or maybe don't listen to music so loud that you damage your ears. You know we care about you and ourselves. It's a choice. That's interesting though actually because when it comes to house parties other people having house parties in your street I've definitely noticed the difference to how much it impacts me when someone has come around before and said actually we're going to be finished by 1am like because it's not the noise that matters. I mean you can fall asleep with the television on right so it's not the noise that's the issue how loud it is it's not knowing when it's going to finish. Or that you've been invited to that party. Yeah I mean that was very hurtful and I'm still upset about it. Anyway the point is these things they're very annoying they're very inconvenient and potentially they can be a bit stressful but actually there is a healthcare aspect of all of this too. Here's Trevor Cox again. So if you've gotten sleep disturbance which happens under flight paths then we all know what it's like when you're woken up another bad night's sleep we're a bit grumpy so our mood is worse we feel tired we feel a phargic so definitely some health effects going on there. I suppose the big worry is the chronic effect so if you live near a noisy road and you've got perpetual environmental noise safe and traffic or industrial work or planes then that contributes to increased risk of things like cardiovascular disease. I mean one of the really interesting areas of research at the moment in environmental noise is whether this calls mental health problems and WHO is very keen to do more research in this area because the suspicion is it does that people are to put it in sort of crude terms are being driven a bit nuts by the noise but what's actually happening and we're not quite sure is whether maybe people who are more susceptible to start off with it's quite hard to get into the cause and effect to look at those kind of mental health effects. We're doing a special episode of Curious Cases today on horrible noises why we hate them and what they can do to our brains. Yes but the true masters of making noises to terrorise us are a special breed of people called foliartists. Foliartists? Yes we need a foliartist and we need some fruit and veg and a big knife and I've got just the person for this she's called cat Thomas and she's from Boom Post and Hannah you are going to love this. I'm saying cat hello. Hello hi. Hi Hannah. So we're in my kitchen with a list of ingredients which we will come to in just a minute very specific things that you requested for this recording but before we get into that what do you do what is your job? I mess around with sounds I play with toys I'm a foliartist. A lot of things in TV and film can't get recorded on set while the actors are there because all the mics they're all set up for the dialogue which is obviously quite key. So they need to fully focus on that so other extraneous sounds like footsteps or me touching my hands like that or whatever it is they don't necessarily get picked up by these dialogue specific microphones so we go to a studio with foli studio and we re-record all those sounds so it's all about bespoke sounds. The character on screen claps i clap if they touch their face if they put a cup down if they smash the mirror off the wall we'll try and do that just whatever happens on screen that is not dialogue that's foli. We're talking specifically in this program about sounds that people really don't like. Tell us some of the things you've worked on because I think the horror genre sound is really important in creating atmosphere isn't it? It's absolutely key I mean not only can it augment the picture that you see on screen it can further exaggerate the feeling of emotion or disgust or tension. I haven't done a lot of horror films but I've done one in recent year or two called Carmilla which had a lot of evisceration and guts and blood and stuff like that so yeah but even stuff like non-horror occasionally needs horrible sounds I work on called the midwife and water's breaking or you know a newborn baby in hand or whatever we try and just add a little bit of you know wetness or whatever. Are you a big fan of horror films? Is that why you go into it? I'm not particularly a fan of horror films actually my sister loves them but I mean I've got better with them over the years because obviously working in the industry you get desensitized to seeing arms get cut off heads get cut off people being disemboweled but if I sit down on a saturday now the last thing I really want to do is make myself scared. Me too. Me too. It's just not fun. It's not strong with you both. You know if you're talking about disemboweling someone or even someone's water's breaking obviously don't do that for real how do you work out what to use? Well you just listen to the sound and there's obviously going to be let's take the example of disemboweling. There's obviously going to be big squidgy elements so think of squidgy things in the world so you know fruit oranges bananas squidgy fruit like that they have a big squid value other things that you might use like marmites and peanut butter and stuff like that depending on the specifics of the scene it depends what frequencies are going on there's a lot of high pitched clicks and cracks and stuff then you might not favor the orange so much it just comes down to them well it's experience but then you've got a focus on what's going on on screen and what frequencies you want to hear from that. Okay now when fee or producer was arranging this interview she gave us a shopping list that you had provided and I've got everything on the shopping list and so it includes a banana actually several bananas three oranges I mean this is the worst let me grab it. It's all the ingredients for either a lovely lunch or a disemboweling. I've got a shopping board and a specific type of pasta you know they work very specific instructions this is contigliones. Yeah that's big shells. Big shells yeah and of course I picked my most horror film cooking knife that I could find in the video. It's pretty good. Okay so when I'm just looking at the instruction I'll be off the thing. Okay yeah okay so with all of these these tools in front of us could we have a go we want to see if we can do what you do and I believe we're going to start with chopping off a finger. Oh lovely well let's start with the bony element so open the packet of pasta. It's going to be a finger though. I mean this must ruin a lot of films for you. When you watch films and you see like this or all things like that you just go oh yeah pasta. Well though I mean if it's done well fast one of the things about fully if it's done well you don't notice it the sound fits there naturally it feels like the actual sounds that happened at the time. Okay I've got my contiglione pasta. Just get one of them in between your palms. Yeah I'll hold it close to my ear. Close my mouth close palms and then just we'll just go for a straight transient at first because when I performed it the other year we wanted a few versions so I wanted a straight just one crack one transient and then I tried a slower crunchy one so we'll just go for a straight crack first. Okay. Crush it in your palms. All right listen this imagine that you're being I don't know tortured by some of your own boss and this is on a pool table and Oh that does sound good. Yeah in context that will sound very good. Well that was a nice sort of slightly longer one let's go for a quicker one. Do you know what we should do? We should get loads of different elements and then just do our own little horror scene at the end which is this new macaroid with pasta and oranges. Yeah. Okay what was what was my what you want this for? Just a quick one just because that was quite a longish crunch so just go for a quick there we go so you've got a couple of versions and they could sit quite nicely together. I don't think we need to just keep crunching and crunching you got the idea. No I'm enjoying myself I'm having a great time. That's fine I mean I almost win this one again. Okay close your eyes and imagine. When you know what's going to happen. Give me the scene again I like that enjoy it. Give me your hand. No. No just just just set your eyes. Give me your hand. I'm going to hold your finger. Oh no. You see that? And I'm going to go. He's bending my finger backwards. Does he do like that thing where you hit someone's like give them a rubber hand and then a hand like that. Brilliant. Okay I'm just getting started. So just open up one of those oranges just to get a bit of... So torch is this. What open up has in a peel it? Or could it with the knife just to get to the squidgy bit inside? Yep orange. Could it a smaller bit actually so you just because you don't want too much squid because obviously your finger is not a particularly big part of the body so of course we're okay. Yeah let's go a bit smaller actually. Simmy remember squeeze to a finger. So again remembering what you did with the bone break it's just imagining a knife going through the finger it wouldn't be squid squid squid squid it would be just squid. So with my hands. Yeah just just prepared to get dirty. Now Hannah hates oranges I think you might even be allergic to them so I don't know how this is going to work. Oh I'm just a moratorium. This is not a great episode. I mean you know they're definitely prefer the one I have chocolate and cake. Okay ready? Do you not just burst into laughter? Well that's one of the things about Foley. Some sounds you know they're going to be quite small so we take precautions we chop up a lot of low frequencies so we only get the frequencies we want we put our volume right up and go right close to the microphone so when you know you're going to get a potentially quiet sound like that you would just take all these precautions first. Okay so that's finger breaking and squishing and oranges what's next on the menu? Wait wait wait with the two hands inside the orange that's beyond a finger right is that are we talking about you know squishing out an eyeball there I mean what we talking about potentially that could work for an eye that could be one of the elements if you wanted to pluck out somebody's eye that could be one of the elements. Nice. Okay let's keep going because we've done finger breaking and squelchy fingers. I know. What's the next one? Yeah let's just do the chop so when you've got a sequence like that finger being chopped off you want to hear each individual element essentially by itself so all I want you to do is to just chop down on the breadboard just with the knife and then just slowly scrape the knife off the breadboard. What? Just onto the board and then okay ready. You just get a clean wooden chop. Oh god that's helpful for the mixers isn't it if they've got the knife and the breadboard element they've got the squid element they've got the bone element and they can mix it as they see fit. I'm just going to do that again because I enjoyed it a lot mostly I enjoyed hammer's reaction. Okay ready. Yes that was better it was bolder yeah it was bigger you know what we're missing there is we're building up this sound you've got the chop you've got the crunch you've got the squish you need the screen. We can get that got ready. Do you do the screens yourself cat? No they would get usually the original actor in to do it when they'd come in to do their dialogue recording or if the actor's unavailable just somebody to actually do a screen but it's not generally Foley's job. Can you do it for us anyway cats? Do I have to? Yes okay. This is the finger chop screen. So it's just imagine my fingers being chopped off okay. Ready. All right Hannah it's your turn. Ready. Ready. Okay you're okay ready. Excellent. All right next so that was the knife on the board. Celery. Yes let's use that for the sort of eviscerating bit but let's get your oranges and bananas. Go on then. Got a banana got an orange. Just open it up I just want you to squidge all the flesh together banana and orange just make a big old mess. Okay right and you want me to cut my banana as well. Yes please. Yeah you just be back with them this squid you're all together. All right ready. Really the bowls don't be coy. That's it. That is absolutely disgusting. It's not like the worst fruit salad in history. To be honest and you're going to have to forgive me here I thought it was all just coconut shells coughing together and now we're going to up and downstairs. I know the level of detail that you're putting into this is absolutely extraordinary. What do you mean the celery? Grab it like that and just good old tight grip and just twist it as much as you can. I don't know how much you're about to break then I'll strong you are. Challenge to my masculinity. What is this like a neck snap or something? Yeah it could be neck it could be arm or it depends on the scene but it could be arm neck leg. That is good isn't it? Quiet please. You don't get away from me that easily. Yeah that was a nice brighter cracks in there that was nice. Okay well one thing that was very obvious from that is that we are terrible actors. Really bad but we have handed over all the audio of our own drum session to Fiona, our producer and so for one episode only. Yes we are proud to present the Rutherford and Fry finger chopping shop of horrors. I'm just going to do that again because I enjoyed it a lot. Mostly I enjoyed Hannah's reaction. Okay ready? That was nice. A bit offended by how much everyone was laughing given that I just had my finger chop so. I think it was a real horror film. They can film a lot less duality. Nope. Very funny. So Dr Fry when it comes to horrible sounds can we say case salt? Yes Dr Rutherford multiple cases in fact awful noises trigger a visceral reaction in our brains. Pitch volume and roughness all play apart. But so do our previous experiences and associations. Some people suffer from mesophonia where sounds cause them great distress. But the big conclusion of today is that Adam and I are both shockingly bad actors. Right terrible actors absolutely shocking actors. Listen as we toyed with the idea Fiona suggested our producer that we should actually script or even ad libous scene in order that the fake finger chopping could be part of that scene. Just to build it up a bit. Build it up a bit. Unfortunately we are such bad actors that we didn't get even close. So it sort of turned into a cockney mock cockney. Hannah does very good accents as we talked about before. All it came down to was as a guy. Right. But you hear finger. I'm going to lock your finger off. Your finger is coming right off. I think we both need to decide not to act and also not to pretend that we could be any sort of script writers. Definitely not that. I was reading John Ronson the other day and there's a bit in John Ronson where he said that when he hears like a fight going on in the street or sees like a video of a fight or whatever he's very interested in he's like oh what's going on in like a kind of intrigued way. And that's slightly blew my mind because I've never felt like that ever. About a fight. Yeah anytime I hear any sort of our great I'm like want to get away as quickly as possible. Oh no no definitely definitely. Are you like hello? Rubber necking yeah. Really? From a distance where you definitely can't get involved. That's that's really important in this. We've got other notes from this recording which just made us laugh a great deal. So we're going to reveal some things about how radio 4 programs are put together. One of the things that happens when we're putting together a program is that when we write the script unbelievable though it might sound we do actually have a script. And then it goes off to well I'll put you so look at it but also the unit editor the editor of the science unit has a quick scan to make sure that there's there that it all works. It's all logical that there's nothing to family tree in there and so on. Today we had one single line one note that came from the editor and it said you're allowed one boob and ten seconds of vomit. In reference to the vomit clip. You said boob again now. That's it again at three times. But this is the podcast how many boobs you're allowed on the phone. We're going to be in such trouble. So much trouble. We've overboobed. So there's a couple of other things that we need to mention here so and we're not getting any more serious in this in this pod unfortunately because this I have to introduce you to it's sort of peripherally relevant but any excuse to play this clip which I think is one of the funniest things that ever happened in the history of things. It comes from a BBC documentary from a few years ago about Neanderthals. You know big part of my work is about pallyontrapology in early humans and Neanderthals and so this is very interesting to me and I wasn't involved in this particular documentary it was called Neanderthal the rebirth and it's a very good documentary genuinely very good. What's the tenuous link that you're giving to the connected with this website? One of the questions that we ask to undergraduate. This is a sort of thought experiment is could Neanderthals speak right and there's a complex answer to do with a specific bone high-oid only one of which has been found and it looks like our own high-oid so you can say yes they were capable of speech and blah blah blah and then you look at the physiology and the anatomy and you try to understand what they might have sounded like what a great question and so in this program they employed an actor and a voice coach trying to emulate this using what we know about the physiology of Neanderthals and this is what it sounds like. Let's try male human voice count over three. One two three. Just pitch up your voice. One two three. Let's just add a bit of nasal now. One two three. Now the other thing that would be happening which would actually increase that quality is a very heavy skull that seems to pull down into the throat there. Now speak. Now let's make a sound. Just let's make a huge r. Just popping in the forest and finding the meaning and not coming out of you. The intensity with the chap who does it is I'm sure he's very very good actor. He must have been thinking all the way through this you know I spent 10 years at Rada. There I am, bellowing at this poor woman. His voice came counting to three like in the anthem. I've got friends who use this in there. I'm to graduate lectures and I don't think any of this. He's actually based on scientific fact. Is that actually what they would sound like? Sort of. No. Not at all. Just whenever you hear the end of the call. Anymore. That the image you can have in your mouth. I'm very sorry. Right so can you do say something please? Should we just go to cure the week now? Yeah let's go to cure the week. Okay I don't have a nice selection of cure the week this week. I think you're going to like it. Starts off by this. Dear Hannah and Mark. My name is Rachel. Whoa why there? Who's Mark? Apparently my new co-host. What? Yeah so Hannah and Mark are other folks. Yeah Hannah and Mark are the first. This is going to have to be really good to get out of that hole. Unfortunately it is. This is from the Tandy family. He are from Western Australia. These are international curios and what they have done is they have enclosed artistic stylings by two of three kids including a possible new design for the curia badge. I mean this is hard for me because the first picture is a lovely photo of Evangeline. Evangeline and she's holding up a picture which I can it says oh she gets her name right in this. Oh yeah. Evangeline gets cured in the week. She says dear Adam I love how you are a biologist and a geneticist. Good. Yes. Adam has a bubble head. Oh you say Adam is a picture she's drawn a picture of Adam as a bubble head. I love bubble heads. No pretty cool. Yeah she's got me as a bubble head as well. I'm fortunate on the bottom there. She's she's loved how you're a biologist and a geneticist. She's all over you Adam. For me it's dear Hannah this is a picture of badge. I enjoy your programs. I mean being a mathematician. Well I'm going to take the lead. No it's not interested. I'm going to take the lead on this one and say that Evangeline gets cured of the week for her excellent picture. Her mum however is in big trubs because she didn't get my name right. Actually the Tandy family have asked us to give a shout out to the dad who is COVID-stranded in Hong Kong. That's pretty awful actually that's happened to a lot of people in Australia hasn't it. There have been real restrictions on the number of people who can move in another country so. Yes well that doesn't excuse her for getting my name wrong. Okay well thank you very much to the Tandy family thank you all for listening. Thank you for sending in questions, secure us cases at bbc.uk and you can join us next time that's me and Mark Rutherford. One two three
