I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Okay, hello, Curios. Another excellent... Oh, I can't see. Just big ourselves out like that. Another average episode of the Curios cases. Media, Curios, you're just trotting out the same old stuff. Hello, Curios. No, we're using that clip. Okay. And this is an episode which is all about Dejal Vue, which means that we spent most of the writing process making... Guess what? Guess what we did. Making one joke over and over again. Just repeatedly. Michelle has extracted almost all of them, but some of them have snuck in as you are about to find out. Indeed you are. Enjoy the show. Welcome to the Curios cases of Rutherford and Fry, where we have yet another mystery that we'll be attempting to solve using the power of science. You know, this is also something strangely familiar. Yeah, that's how we always open the show. I don't... But this particular question was sent in to Curios cases at BBC.co.uk by Floyd Kitchen from Queenstown. Okay, he says, I am from New Zealand and currently traveling through Japan. The other day just after checking into a hotel that I've never been to before, in a country that I've never been to before, I had Dejal Vue. Do we know what causes it? And that question was sent in by Floyd Kitchen from Queenstown. You literally just said that. Did I? Okay. Anyway, I asked world-leading researcher Chris Moulin from the University of Grenoble in France. What Dejal Vue is and when it's most likely to strike? It's really that eerie sensation that the last few seconds where you might be convinced that something is familiar. But then it passes and you realize, no, that was strange, that was not right, that was not familiar. You get that amazing thing in Dejal Vue where you've got like almost two realities in parallel and then one drops off and you just think, oh, it's Dejal Vue. And then when you resolve to the present moment and you come out of the Dejal Vue, that for me is the Dejal Vue researcher. That's the bit I love. That's like, oh, great, I had the Dejal Vue. Okay, but our question of Floyd, he said that he experienced Dejal Vue when he was on holiday. So, is that a common thing to happen? So typically, Dejal Vue is about places and when we have it most strongly, it is about completely new novel experiences. And the reason for that is because that gives you that conflict, that strong sensation that something is familiar combined with the knowledge that this is the first time I've been here. This can't be a memory. So it tends to be somewhere they haven't been before and that feeling of familiarity? Yeah, so that's the biggest clue. And in fact, if you do questionnaires on the topic, you find that the more people travel and the more they do long distances from their home, the more they get Dejal Vue. In terms of the average person, though, how often do they get Dejal Vue? So it's really infrequent. We would say, if you're young and you're having it at the peak, you would not expect to have it more than once a month. Also, it's related to age, is it? It is related to age. So it drops off to about half of the rate that you've experienced it by the time you're about 40 or 50. By the time you get into your 60s, you're lucky to have one a year. Now, for most of us, Dejal Vue is an occasional quirk, a fleetingly weird feeling that we can resolve fairly quickly. But in very rare cases, it can be much more serious. When I first started experiencing it, I'd wake up in the morning sometimes and a straight away, I'd feel that sense of familiarity. Sometimes I'd feel like it was there, that sense of familiarity. I mean, it was with me the whole day. Lisa is 49 from Human Manchester. When she was just 22, she started experiencing some very severe episodes of Dejal Vue. I mean, at first, it was really scary. If it happened when you were outside, you'd have to carry on. Even though you could just stand still and watch all this going on that you feel like you've seen before. If I woke up in the morning and I felt that way, you know, immediately I would avoid being outside and being with people. My mum has been there for me throughout. She witnessed the very first time it happened to me, and it knocked me for six. I walked over to her, I just put my hands on her and I said, just hold me, I mean, it was like I was trying to hold onto reality. I'm asleep. It was that strange, you know. That sounds horrendous. Yeah, it does, but the good news is that these kinds of extreme experiences have been able to help scientists start to uncover the causes of Dejal Vue, so we're going to come back to Lisa's story in a bit. Now, this eerie feeling that Dejal Vue is somehow interfering with the reality is the very thing that captured the attention of the psychics and psychologists who began studying it. It happened when I first saw a monument, a landscape, a person, which made me realise suddenly and in spite of my judgement, I had already seen what I was seeing, impossible to say where nor when, the memory, like the sensation of Dejal Vue, was no less very alive and very clear. This is a letter sent to the French journal Revue Philophos Vique in 1876 by Emil Barak. He coined the term Dejal Vue. I had already recorded this experience with my reading. Suddenly, for no apparent reason, I recall having read that page, these lines, the same words printed with their letters and the particular taste of the mental state where I had found myself then, comes back very freshly. Must we assume, like imagination, the memory has its own hallucinations? Back then, in the 19th century, especially in France, there was considerably more overlap between mainstream psychology and what we would now call parapsychology. So Barak, who used the term first, he was in fact what we would now describe as a parapsychologist. So he did experiments on telekinesis and remote viewing and he actually said that he wanted psychology to be much closer to psychic powers and that was his vision for psychology. So that might explain, in fact, why the history of Dejal Vue dropped away from being studied in mainstream psychology and it was for a long time considered a paranormal experience. And in fact, when I arrived for my first lectureship at the University of Leeds, one of my colleagues said to me, you can't do research on Dejal Vue, that's like doing research on the existence of ghosts. So do some people still think that it's a paranormal experience? They do and they contact me and I'm happy to be contacted about it because what is science for if it's not for exploring things like that? Yeah, I really like that. Yeah, I agree. I don't think science should be there to shut down, people's lived experiences. It should be there to understand them. And then shut them down? No. Okay, fine, but remember Lisa and her intense Dejal Vue, well over the next seven years, her experience became even stranger. It happened more frequently than it went on. Really intense feelings with it as well, you know, everything seemed wilder, louder, brighter, taste was affected, every kind of sensation, you know, had weird feelings of being bigger. I am, general feeling of this reality is not quite the same, you know, and I can't explain it to anyone. Until finally Lisa made a chance discovery that explained everything. It was one of those kind of serendipitous moments that you have that we all have. I didn't go to seek help. It's only professionals, I bought some books, I bought books on philosophy and psychology and science and stuff and I had one book is The Oxford Companion to the Mind. As soon as I got the book, I did that flick thing where you just sort of flick the pages and then open it on a page and I landed on Dejal Vue and I was like, oh, you mentioned this type of epilepsy, temporal lobe epilepsy. I mean, everything it described fit with what I was experiencing. So I went to the doctor, my local doctor armed with this book and said, that's what's happening to me. After finding a specialist, medication and support from a group called epilepsy action, Lisa managed to control her Dejal Vue. According to psychologist Catherine Love Day, her experience fits exactly into the symptoms of this particular type of epilepsy. A very interesting study found that the Dejal Vue that accompanies epilepsy is actually very similar to the Dejal Vue that the rest of us experience, but what was different was how long the experience went on for and also they found that patients with epilepsy tended to have other experiences. So sometimes they would have tastes in their mouth or particular smell or they sometimes had a feeling of fear. So for most of us, it's a very fleeting momentary, slightly intriguing thing. When people have it alongside epilepsy, it can be quite prolonged and it can be accompanied by quite unpleasant feelings. Now, the problem with studying Dejal Vue is that it's really hard to recreate in the lab, but because people with temporal lobe epilepsy like Lisa experience it regularly, studying them gives scientists a chance to unravel possible causes and they think it's all connected to our memory. Some of the most important experiment findings on Dejal Vue have come from working with people who have temporal lobe epilepsy. So memory does use lots and lots of different parts of the brain, but the temporal lobe seems to be really important in terms of our experience of remembering our feeling that we've experienced something before. This is somewhere we've been, this is something that we haven't just imagined. So one of the theories around Dejal Vue is that if that circuit fires when it's not supposed to, then it will give us that sense of remembering even if we haven't actually experienced something before. Okay, let me make sure I understand this then. The temporal lobe is triggered when it shouldn't be and that makes a kind of false memory. Yeah, so we get a sort of false sense of familiarity. That's probably the leading theory at the moment. Okay, and Chris Moonin told me there is another step in the process that helps our brain realize its mistake and resolve the Dejal Vue. The story doesn't stop there because what we think is going on is that there's a second system which is supervising what happens in the temporal lobe, which signals to us, hey hang on a minute, this is the first time I've been to Japan or the first time I've met this person. Is that second system almost like a fact checking system? It has been described as like a fact checking system and I love that metaphor. I think that's the way human memory must work. We've got kind of like a fast automatic system which can do lots of the work but then there is the second system which is a fact checking system that's kind of real. I'm going to try and now search for evidence that your evaluation of familiarity is correct. So Dr. Fry, when it comes to Dejal Vue, can we say case soul? Well, we know it often happens when you're travelling in completely new places that feel strangely familiar. In severe cases, it can be a symptom of a certain type of epilepsy. And that's helps psychologists to reduce it connected to the temporal lobe in our brains. Which misfires and gives us a false sense of familiarity. Before our brains fact checking system comes in and tells us we're wrong. So Dr. Fry, when it comes to Dejal Vue, can we say case soul? Not stealing my joke. Yeah, okay, sorry, it's stealing a joke but it's such a good one though, isn't it? I just want to do it repeatedly. You used it in inside science as well to talk about this. I saw your script. I know, I agree. This is true. It's just a little too. I know, I'm quite pleased I've got to see you suspect, but anyhow, you know, obviously we get to speak to tons of very, very interesting clever scientist people on this programme. But I think this programme, more than any other, is the one that I've sort of brought up and told other people about. Because everyone, I think you're saying experience that everyone can connect with, right? Yeah, absolutely. When we talk about whether we can throw Hannah into the sun, it was Hannah into a black hole. Yeah, really doesn't connect with my experience of life. It doesn't, strangely, or a lot of the more esoteric, slightly philosophical ones that we've done, which are great fun, or even at sun, you know, to about the fifth dimension. Not really part of one's lived life. No, it's not. But this one struck quite close to Hannah because my sister, who believes some interesting things, well, anyway, I asked Chris Moulin about what she thinks about deja vu. My sister, I have had conversations with her before about deja vues, and she claims that when she has them, not only does she have that feeling of familiarity, but she can predict what's going to happen next before it happens. I've had this feeling. So I have had a deja vu on a plane heading back from a conference where I was discussing memory. And the deja vu was so intense, I was on the plane. I started to predict what was going to happen next. And to my horror, what was going to happen next was the plane was going to go into a nose dive. I was going to hear the engine no change, and the plane was going to dive down. And it was a really big long deja vu, very intense one. And of course, half of me is delighted because I'm a deja vu researcher. And the other half of me really thinks that I can predict what's going to happen. And I had the feeling of doom and everything like that. Okay, let's just make, let's just clear this up there. The plane didn't go into a nose dive after you predicted it away. No, no. So there's neuroscientific explanations of why this happens. The memory system, one of the things it does for us is predict the future. That's why we have memory. It's to help us not to make the same mistakes again and to anticipate what's about to happen next. So when you get a strong deja vu, and we can even say, if it discharges further into the brain and implicates more brain areas, then it might touch emotions and it might touch visual imagery and things like that. So you may get that sensation that you can predict what's about to happen next. And yet, I imagine that there would have been occasions where people made a prediction about what was going to happen. Consciously or however, and just through chance, it did end up happening. Yeah, absolutely. And that's where we get into the science of coincidences. Sometimes when we have deja vu, it is for mundane things like conversations. So it's quite likely, yeah, I knew you were going to say that. So that's just the coincidence of having a deja vu at the same time as you're talking to one of your most predictable friends. Yeah, either that or she's a prophet. No, that might be it. Is she a prophet? She's descended from God. She's the prophet's bride. She can predict the conversations about five minutes in advance. But that is that there's another psychological phenomenon which Christ didn't mention there. But I think we've talked about on the show before, which is confirmation bias, which is that we remember and recall things that reaffirm our biases and we tend to forget things. But don't it's very true. Don't you also, I mean, I'm a rational person, right? I was, you know, I consider myself like scientifically literate, well read all of those different kind of things. But every now and then I do also forget that I can't predict the future. Like you'll be like, okay, if I don't walk over this drain that's got three in a row, then this exam will go well. Or you know, that kind of thing. And I have to remind myself regularly that I can't actually either control or predict the future. I spent a couple of years of my life not that long ago in my 30s convinced that I could speak to cats. And it started as a sort of joke to myself, because I only ever do it when I'm on my own. I'll see a cat in the street and just go, and have a conversation with the cat. And it just amused me because it was a silly thing to do. But you kind of knew that you couldn't, but you sort of believed that you could. Yes. And it went on for so long that it got to the point where I was thinking, maybe I can speak to cats. Would they react? No, they're cats. They don't get a monkey's about what you're saying to them. They feel like they were reacting. Oh yeah, they kind of look at you and go, yeah brother. I don't think that's what it is then. I think anyway, moving on. Moving on. It says Michelle's put in the script here, just chat about something. And I think that I was discussing my ability to speak to cats. I'm not sure she was aiming for it. I thought I'm pretty sure it was. Should we get back to the particular cats that you prefer to their brothers with all the same cats? Some cats are real jerks. I think we've talked about my cats and one of them's great. And one of them's a joke. Have I mentioned that I was in the choir? No, that's never come up. Anyway, back to deja vu after our little cat interlude. We were talking about why deja vu happens. And we were talking about what we think is the leading theory at the time, which is that the temporal lobe misfires and it gives us a sense of familiarity, which is now, I guess, rather than at the time. Incorrect, yes, exactly. But there have been loads of other explanations dreamt off over the years from the sensible to the slightly more outlandish and our psychologists, Catan Love Day told us. Over the years, people have tried really hard to come up with theories about why we have this weird experience of deja vu. They've been theories about parallel universes and that two parallel universes collide at that moment and that gives you that sensation and people have talked about reincarnation. And neurologically, people have discussed various things like, for example, when we experience a scene that possibly the visual sensory information goes in a slightly different pace than the auditory information and maybe sometimes that mismatch might give us that experience. And also, there are a lot of theories that look at the idea that maybe something in your environment triggers that memory system without you being conscious of it. So I might go into give a lecture at a conference in a completely different city in a very different room, but there might be elements of that room that match very closely with what I experience on a very regular basis. And so for a moment, as I'm about to deliver the lecture, I actually feel that I've been in this exact place before because somewhere that familiarity has sort of triggered a part of the memory system that makes me feel that this isn't a new experience at all. That's very familiar to me. What she's just described is basically I've only got about four anecdotes. And you know, I've told them to you about eight times, so you've heard most of my stories at least twice. Yeah, I mean, these are all great theory and maybe it's just maybe people I just psychic, maybe maybe we've missed something and maybe I can speak to cats. Maybe we're going to get you. We're going to get you. You know what though? Actually, so my favorite thing in this whole program, we haven't heard yet because my favorite thing in this whole program is actually the opposite of Dave Javu. Did you know this was a thing? I know. Do you want to guess what it's called the opposite of Dave Javu? Is it, Dave Javu means already, so what's the opposite of already not seen? No, no, no, no, no, Dave Javu. No part Dave Javu. It's jamais vu. Never used to be. jamais vu. Here is Chris Mullen who's telling me all about it. jamais vu is this experience that you know something's familiar and yet it feels strange. So you can get it when you look at people's faces. Do you look at somebody who's very, very familiar to you? Let's say your wife and you look at her and suddenly she looks different, almost like a stranger to you and usually that will pass. But the classic experience of jamais vu is with words. So you go to write a word and I had it once for the word this and I write the word this and I looked at it and I just thought that that can't be right. That's not how it's spelled. And then a bit like Dave Javu, that passes and you think, oh no, that is, that's right, that's how you spelled this. I've had it with soldier before. I don't know quite why I was looking so carefully at the word soldier, but it suddenly seemed like the most alien concept. Actually, I still find soldier a bit weird after that. Yeah, and that's the great thing. So you can induce jamais vu much more easily than you can induce deja vu. So in fact, if you say soldier, soldier, soldier, soldier over and over, I'm torturing you now. If you say it over and over and over like that, it will gradually get that sense. It loses meaning and it becomes very bizarre. It comes like a sound and not like a concept. Yeah, the word for me that always triggers what I now know is jamais vu is ple. Ple! As in a ple. Ple! Ple! Ple! Ple! Ple! Ple! Ple! Ple! It just, I mean, what is that? And I looked at it, you know, both of us write and say you write the words and you type them down and you look at them and you read them over and then it just gets locked and you start looking at it once this is, this is just like ink. I mean, it's like a symbol. It's just weird shapes on the head. Yeah, it doesn't have any meaning at all. It's what it's what it's writing. What is page? What's the line? It's the line. It's the line. It's the line of years of writing and we've got to the stage where neither of us know what ple or soldier mean. Anyway, enough of weird symbols. You know what time it is now, I don't know. What time is it? Tell me what time is it for? Curie of the week. Past and curious occasion, the least curious, totalingy cheek. Rather than a fries, Curie of the week. Nice different jiggle this week. Is that different? We don't always have that one. Michelle's dropping a new jiggle there. They have the ball. That's the full one. Oh, the full one. I know. We don't always get the full ball. Curie of the week. Go. I'm thinking that's my ringtone on my phone. Anyway, we got an email in from Nadia Golland-Cover. I'm going to guess that's how you say her name. I think you hit the O. I think it's Gallant Golland-Cover. Anyway, we got an email in from Nadia Golland-Cover. She said, I am a long time listener and fan from Brisbane, Australia. We're getting lots of sudden hemispheres. I guess most of our listeners should have appeared to be from the Antipodes. Australia. I was excited to hear about your upcoming episode on deja vu. I experience this all the time, usually in all sorts of really mundane situations like work meetings, grocery shopping, while hiking, etc. I estimates that I get deja vu about once every month or more. When I was young, I used to suspect that I had some sort of psychic gift. You and me both, Nadia. But now I think it actually might just be my brain remembering similar dreams. It's pretty depressing to think that my dreams consist mainly of work meetings and groceries. Yes, disappointing. What I want to know is how she knew this episode was going to be about deja vu. Maybe she is a profit. I think we released a teaser. Yeah, I need to pay more attention to those. Maybe. That email goes on there. Here you go. Right, so here's the second part. My husband, Michael, has awesome dreams in which he flies around like a superhero and fights dinosaurs. You and me both, Michael, in response to my deja vu problem, he often tells me that he suffers from vujade. That's his term, but he's invented it by the way. Vujade, which is the strange feeling that none of this ever happened before. We're looking forward to the episode to learn about our respective conditions. So his vujade is that Michael hasn't actually fought dinosaurs and can't fly like a superhero. Have I understood that correctly? You know what, there Nadia? I mean, the evidence that's there for Michael having these awesome dreams is only that Michael's telling you about them. He could quite easily be having dreams about washing his car and I don't know, folding shirts and not tell you about it and then come down in the morning and be like, I had this amazing dream about a dragon. Or he might be having dreams about Arnold Schwarzenegger with tight shorts on going cycling, but his legs would, we've done the episode on dreams already. Again, no evidence of that really happened. Did, didn't it? Well, I want to hear more about Michael's awesome dreams, but I don't think that's for the program. I just want to share stories about fighting dinosaurs as superheroes. So thank you, Nadia, the true psychic and her husband, who clearly makes things up all the time. We will see you next week. This is the BBC.
