Welcome to episode two of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. Yes, now this question is another one of the questions we like dealing with because they actually have come from a previous program. It's not the first time that this has happened. How where are... It's not the first question extra that we've had on this particular program either. No, it's not. But I see... Yes, this is another one. It's not even spheres inspired a lot of extra questions. Yeah, most of them seem to rotate around my weight. Do I don't think it's such a big issue? Yeah, I possibly should have thought a bit longer and harder before I... What did you actually say? I don't know what the end of this sentence is. No, what did you say? You said... I think I called you a bit pojee and then there was some stuff about crisps and I said I'm saying nothing. Right. I like crisps. Yeah, I like crisps too, man. Yeah, but look at your girth compared to mine. We've been through this already. I have eight months pregnant! Yeah, okay. That is not an unreasonable excuse. This episode is part one of two on the concept of nothing. In this one, it's all a bit philosophical and... Well, does nothing exist? Is it possible to ever really have nothing? So, and let no one say that we don't choose hard science and hard concepts. And it was also an excuse for us to do lots of really bad dad jokes about us doing nothing. Indeed, enjoy them. Now, I know it's not your birthday, but I do have a little present for you because I love working with you so much. Excellent. You love a present. Here it is. It's all wrapped up. It's a box. Thanks Adam. That's been massive, you. Yeah, really is nothing. Oh my gosh. What is it? What's it going to be? Nothing. I know. It's literally nothing. An empty box. Well, listen, all is going to be revealed when we tackled today's question, which was emailed in curiouscases at BBC.co.uk by Bill Keck. He was inspired by a throwaway line in one of our previous episodes of Study in Spears. That was a cruel trick. I'm saying nothing was Dr. Hannah Fry's loaded parting shot in that episode. So, my question is, is there any such thing as nothing? Now, this question about nothing turned out to be so ironically packed with things that we're devoting not one, but two episodes to the hunt for nothing. I'm still grumpy, but we thought that we would start with space. Because that's big empty, generally devoid of stuff, you'd say. So, here it is, Cosmogist and all-round-nice chap, Dr. Andrew Ponson. Is there such thing as nothing? It really depends a little bit what you mean by nothing, but I think the best answer we can come up with is, note there is always something. What about in deep space, though? Even in deep space. If you look at the structure of space, it's made up of quite dense things like galaxies and stars and planets, and then big empty voids. But, even in what we call the empty voids, there is still stuff out there. It's probably at a roundabout level of one particle per every 10 cubic metres or something. You wouldn't have to look very far to find something. But there are still areas in that block of space that does have nothing in it. Yeah, kind of, but of course, then you have to start asking, or what do we really mean by nothing? We can handle this. What is nothing? Well, surely nothing is just what's there when you take everything away. Yes, but when is nothing really nothing? And when is it something? Interesting and confusing question, Grasov. Well, Sensei, it is something that's confused people for millennia. The Greek philosopher Tali's, he spent a lot of time thinking about nothing, and to tell us more, his physicist, Professor Frank Close, who literally wrote nothing. Yeah, but that's the title of his book, right? It is, yes. He will have one more of those jokes. Tali's insisted that there was no such thing as no thing, let's say nothing. And I think the idea was that it was very hard to understand how you would get something out of nothing. That is the great conundrum that we even still have. What was there before the universe began? He certainly believed that the universe couldn't have come from nowhere, where it really gets deep is the idea that even thinking about nothing makes it something. Tali's decided that you could only have nothing if there was nothing there even to think about nothing. Okay, so let me get this right. By contextualising the description of the absence of something, then you are in effect describing something. Exactly. Tali's thought that nothing could only exist if there was no one to think about it. Now, Aristotle also hated the concept of empty space. It's from him that we get the notion that nature of haurs are vacuum. Aristotle didn't believe that you could have avoid, because avoid would be uniform and symmetric. There would be no up or down. There would be nothing to differentiate front and back or sideways. If you then imagine some object in this nothingness, it wouldn't be able to move or fall because there would be no meaning to the concept of fall. So it would be in a permanent state of rest. You couldn't have motion. But the more Aristotle thought about nothing, more problematic, it became. Then he thought, well, could empty space be something? And he decided it couldn't be, because if empty space is already something and you put a body into empty space, you'd have two somethings in the same place, which was for him illogical. So he then decided that, therefore, empty space can't be something. And yet at the same time, it can't be nothing either. So if you tried to think about a vacuum, you were thinking about something which was completely non-existent. If people are still saying, listening to this, you are beginning to understand the sort of mind-boggling concepts that start hitting you when you start trying to think about nothing. Yeah, my brain hurts. Think nothing of it. That's it. Now that is your quota. That one didn't even make any sense. Okay, let's wind forward a couple of thousand years, because while great thinkers like Galileo were still trying to grapple with the idea of nothing and the concept of vacuums, inventor and politician Otto von Gerik was setting about trying to build one. In 1654, he revealed his vacuum to the world. Now picture the scene, if you will. In front of the excited crowd, von Gerik brandished two copper hemispheres about the size of a basket ball. He greased the rims and pushed them together. The local fire service was on hand and attached a pump to a valve in the side of one hemisphere. The air was gradually removed and the valve closed. Two bands of horses were harnessed to each side of the ball. They galloped in the opposite direction, trying with all of their might to separate the metal sphere. Yeah, I'm not sure that this is incredibly historically accurate. For a start, I'm pretty sure there weren't any basket balls or fire engines in the 1650s. And have you ever tried to get a band of horses to gallop in the same direction? This is my imaginary story. Okay, you're gonna let me finish? Okay. Finally, von Gerik opened the valve to let the air back in. The vacuum was broken and the hemispheres fell easily apart. Finally, disproving Aristotle's idea that nature appores a vacuum. So this great demonstration, what was going on? Well, when you've removed the air from inside the spheres, you've got the weight of the atmosphere pushing on their outside, but there's no longer an equal force pushing back from the inside, because the air's been taken out. So that was what his demonstration did. It showed if you removed the air, you could do some wonderful demos, and it gave an insight into the nature of vacuum. And it really showed that it's the weight of the atmosphere, that is causing a lot of the phenomena that people have previously thought was because nature was abhorring a vacuum. All right, but I can't help thinking that we haven't really found nothing. Even if you can make a vacuum, even with the help of your imaginary German fireman or in the lab, is that vacuum genuinely empty? Good question. I asked Andrew Pondton. The kind of vacuums that we can make here on Earth are not really anything approaching even what you find in deep space. And the fundamental problem is there's just so much stuff in the air around us here on Earth. The amount of stuff in the air is something like 10 million, million, million, million particles per cubic meter. And so even if you suck out, say, a factor of a million of those, you'd still got 10 million, million, million particles per cubic meter. And so that is not a vacuum. No, there's a lot of stuff going on in there. OK, but what about inside the atom then? Because there's a lot of empty space in there, right? Yeah, kind of. But of course, then you hit something called quantum mechanics. And one of the aspects of quantum mechanics is that even when you have absolutely nothing, there's still some level of energy there. And that energy, you can think of it as particles, little bits of stuff, constantly appearing and disappearing all the time. That sounds quite a weird thought. Particles popping into existence out of nothing. Yeah. Well, not nothing. Small levels of energy. Small levels of energy. But although it sounds like something that I just made up, it's something you can go and actually measure this in the lab. There's something called the chasmereffect, which is basically where you put two metal plates, just a small distance apart from each other. And you can actually measure, it's quite small, but there is a force attracting those two metal plates together. And our best explanation for what is going on there is to do with particles popping in and out of existence on either sides of these plates. And turns out that that then exerts a pressure that pushes the plates together. And like I say, you can actually go and measure it. OK, we're in real trouble now if we're talking about quantum fluctuations. I don't think it's too bad actually, because the energy fluctuations in the vacuum can just spontaneously turn into electrons and positrons. But they only last for a very brief moment. So about a billion trillionth of a second, it is just like borrowing energy from the universe and paying it back so quickly that nobody knows. Yeah, OK, like that time I borrowed your lip gloss. OK, and you put it back before I noticed. Sorry. OK, back to quantum physics then. Let's say that we could get rid of all of the particles and get rid of those weird effects then you would have nothing. Well, no, not really, because there's another problem with nothing. And that's the Higgs field. Blah, blah. He's Frank Close, who's a physicist to explain. So even apart from the idea of quantum fluctuations, we now know that we're immersed in some weird fluid, which we call the Higgs field. Now we've discovered the Higgs boson, which is a manifestation of the Higgs field. We know that we're all in the middle of this stuff. And it is because of the presence of this stuff that fundamental particles like electrons as they pass through this stuff, they feel its presence and manifest what we call mass. And we know that this is not science fiction because if there is an all-pervading field of stuff, if you hit it in just the right way, you can make it what's called resonate. And the resonating is like forming a wave inside of this stuff. And the wave will manifest itself by a particle, which we call the Higgs boson. So it was the discovery of the Higgs boson that confirmed that if you hit this stuff in just the right way, you can make it show itself. So we now know we're definitely immersed in it. It is everywhere. It's in all directions the same. And so the idea of nothing is now gone forever. There's definitely something the Higgs field, but what it actually is is still one of the big questions. So, Dr. Rutherford, in answer to Bill's question, does nothing exist? Can we say K-Solve? Yes, nothing doesn't exist. And because quantum physics tells us that something can come out of nothing. And the Higgs field gives that something mass, creating everything we know of today. Ah, but I know where we can definitely find nothing. Always that, then. Mathematics. Nothing as in zero. Oh, yes. And in the next episode, we are going to be hunting for the origin of zero. Outstanding. Aren't you forgetting something? What, my present? Yes. Thanks for nothing. Did you like my hilarious joke with the present? You know, I genuinely thought you had actually got me a present. It was really nicely wrapped. It was what Michelle did the wrapping, because I can't do wrapping like that. But we've been planning this for weeks, and every time it came up, both of us would make this noise. Yeah, she's going to like this hilarious. You look disappointed. I wasn't disappointed. You know what, when I was a kid, yeah. I really wanted more than anything a locket. I don't know why, just really wanted one. Like a throat suite? No, no. But that's exactly what my hilarious sisters do. They wrapped up. They put it in a jewelry box and everything. They put it under the tree and they wrapped it all up. And that was my Christmas. And the thing is normally you do a joke like that. And then it's like, ah, ah, here's your real present. There was no second stage. Oh, that's brutal and really funny. So we used to do something a bit similar with my brothers that we get big boxes from previous presents. Wrap them up really nicely. And inside there'd be like a felt tip pen without a lid on it or a staple. But when you also then get them something else. And that was the end of episode two of this season. Oh, curious cases. But it doesn't end here. Nothing doesn't end here. More nothing jokes. Yeah, we are only halfway through nothing. Don't forget, send us your scientific conundrums to... Everyday scientific mysteries. What's the email address? Curious cases that we visit don't go to K. I said that bit faster than I. A little bit. Curious cases, it would be zig-zag-zag. Exactly. And there you have it. And they wonder we don't get any in. They wonder what we do. We do, but we always want more.
