I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC It's a second episode on Moon Stuff. Yay, moons, we love the moon. And this is the second part, which is the even better part. I'm not... yeah. I actually quite like moons. But now after the way that you've delivered that line, I'm not sure what you do. Yeah, I know, I super do. Was that not sincere? You challenged myself to see a man love. Did it not? It didn't sound authentic. I seriously love the moon, no. I really do. I really do. Well, tell me three things you like about the moon. The facts that you get these weird, glassy crystals at the edges of the craters. And when they sampled them in the Apollo missions, that told us how old the earth was. Boom one. Number two. It's close to us. Number three. Dig... Giii... There's songs about it. The whole of the moon by the water boys. Dark side of the moon by Pink Floyd. Even though we discussed the last episode, there isn't a dark side of the moon. It's far side of the moon. Blue moon. We did it the forward, didn't we? Lots of versions of the moon. I give you two and a half stars on the moon facts. Two and a half? Out of how many? Three. That's all right. Famously, moons are scored on three stars. I didn't know that. I didn't know that. You know what though? We have got actually quite a lot of excellent moon facts coming up in this episode. I wonder if I know more back facts or moon facts. Let's see, shall we? On with the episode. Welcome back to this. The second installment in our double moon mystery. Yes, so to recap, this was all sparked by an email to curiouscasesatbbs.co.uk from one Harley Day who asked, Why do we only have one moon? And what would life be like if we had more? Right, and in the last installment, we explored how the moon actually formed. And how we ended up with one solitary lunar neighbour. But in this episode, we're going to discover the profound effects that the moon has had on life, on earth. Good point, Adam. What has the moon ever done for us? Well, it gave us the tides. OK, apart from that. Well, it probably helped establish life on earth too. OK, apart from that, though. Well, it offers spectacular eclipses that have inspired humans for thousands of years. Yeah, OK. But apart from the tides, life, or an inspiration for human sense antiquity, what has the moon ever done for us? Right. Tell you what, let's show exactly how important the moon is. Let's start at the beginning, to a very good place to start. In the last episode, this is what Maggie Adair and Pocock told us about how the moon formed. Really, it was a smashing story. The idea is that the earth is traveling through space and along comes something about the size of Mars. And it's been called fear. And so it comes in and hits the earth with a glancing blow. Yeah, cup out. And because the earth is sort of had the huge impact, matter is thrown out into space. And this matter slowly but surely sort of coalesces to form the moon. So a rock named fear about the size of Mars smashes into the early earth and ends up forming the moon. And it was a cataclysmic collision that changed our planet forever. One of the big impacts it has quite literally is that it tilted the earth. Here's astronomer Brendan Owens from the Royal Observatory in Greenwich. And the tilt of the earth, and tilt of any planet is what gives it its seasons. So by having a tilt in the first place, that's how we experience our spring, summer, autumn and winter. And this affects how high the sun appears in the sky, depending on your location on the earth. And that's the angle of sunlight. How much different parts of the earth are heated and for how long, and how long our hours of daylight are. If we didn't have the moon doing this in the first place, not only would we not have seasons, we might have ended up with something a bit more catastrophic like the planet Venus with a runaway greenhouse effect. We might have ended up with no life on planet earth, whatsoever. Our other planet tilted then, or is it just us? Don't planets have seasons? Yeah, absolutely. So we have the planet Uranus, which is quite literally knocked on its side, so it sort of roly-poly's around the sun. So you get part of it's a year in permanent nighttime, and the other half in permanent daylight. So a day would last half a year. Yeah, just think about how much work you could get done. Oh yeah, and then you could just hibernate for the rest of the year. Sounds absolutely delightful. Yeah. Now, 2019 is the 50th anniversary of the first moon landings by Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong, but as well as setting foot on another world, the lunar landings help us discover how the moon formed and how it's changed. Probably the most famous thing that Buzz and Neil left behind on the lunar surface was their footprints, but less well known is the story of the mirror on the moon. Finding a nice, flat piece of moon rock, Aldrin carefully lays down the LRQ, as he calls it, the lunar laser-ranging retro-reflector, and then Armstrong angles the plate of 100 small mirrors until they point back down towards the earth. The laser-reflector is installed and the bubble level and the alignment appears to be good. Neil, is the Earth an Hydra? Now, the point of this shiny silver device, which was about the size of a microwave oven, was to measure how far away the moon is from the earth. So up until this day, scientists all around the world, they'll fire lasers at this mirror on the moon. Time how long it takes that beam to bounce back to give them exactly how far away the moon is. Yeah, firing lasers at the moon has to be the most sci-fi experiment ever undertaken. It's got to be up there. It's cool. But here's what gets interesting, because they've repeated this experiment year on year. We now know that the moon is actually spiraling away from us. It's moving away about a rate of four centimetres a year, which is roughly as fast as your fingernails grow, which means, logically, that in the past, when the moon formed, it must have been much closer to the Earth. Yeah, exactly. So the best estimates say that the moon is now about 17 times further away than it was when it formed. Now, that brings us to the question of life, because the formation of the moon, and the fact that it was much closer to us back then, this is absolutely fundamental to creating the world as we know it today. Go on. Right, so this giant collision that formed the moon, it left the Earth reeling and spinning much faster than today, and that made some really big waves. The moon, along with the sun, creates the tides, as we all know. But when the moon was first born, the Earth was covered in giant waves, reaching up to 10,000 feet, that's three kilometres high. The high tides that were created by the moon, they scoured the land. Astrophysicist and author Neil Cummins from the University of Maine. The 10,000 foot tides went inland and out every few hours, every two or three hours. And that water flow eroded the young continents and put a huge amount of mineral content into the oceans. The primordial soup. But if the primordial soup had not been put there by the moon, that early life, single cell stuff, would not likely have been able to survive and to replicate, and to expand and to evolve. And so without the moon, it is most unlikely that life in the complex forums it exists today would be here yet. So are we saying that without the moon, we wouldn't be here, that life wouldn't exist? Yeah, it's impossible to know, but without the tides, without the tilt of the Earth, we just wouldn't have life as we know. We don't know whether life would exist at all, but we certainly wouldn't be here, because those waves stirred up all the ingredients on the lands and seeded what needed to happen for life to come about. Okay, so it had an ancient input. Yeah, well, it's not just life in the past, because we know that it has a huge impact on life today as well, from sea birds to whistle worms. The lunar cycle itself still has a massive influence over so much life on Earth. And this is a subject that has fascinated scientists for centuries. In the 17th century, philosopher Charles Morton theorized that birds migrated to the moon over winter, flying at a dizzying 125 miles an hour. We now know that one particular seabird, Barrow's Petrol, relies on the moon during their travels, synchronising their arrival back in the tropical colony to coincide with the full moon. And marine bristle worms only reproduce at new moon with a rapid mating dance, culminating in the release of sperm and eggs and the unfortunate death of both partners. And they say romance is dead. For us humans, life revolves around the 24-hour day, the time it takes to rotate once around our axis. And to keep up with this time, we have our very own biological clock. That evolved because of the length of the day on Earth. Now, if the moon had never existed, and if the Earth was spinning faster, then first of all, those biological clocks would be synchronised or cycled around the length of the shorter day on that version of the Earth. Well, imagine trying to get as much done in eight-hour day as we have to do in a 24-hour day, so the cycle of activities, the cycle of growth of plants, the cycle of behaviours of the creatures, would be profoundly different on such a world. Okay, so perhaps the moon is pretty important after all. Thank you, vital, essential to the seasons, the day, our body clocks to life, pretty much everything. All right, you've made your point. So if the moon is so good, why not spy it a more? Yeah, what would life be like if we had more than one moon? Or how about 60, like Jupiter? All butting around the great gas giant of Jupiter is I.O. It's about the same size as our own moon, and a similar distance from its home planet. But that is where the similarity ends, because I.O. couldn't be more different and more weird if it tried. As astronomer Brendan Owens describes, It is a very unusual world, and when you see pictures of I, it looks a bit like a moldy pizza. Very, very different from our moon. A moldy pizza. It's got these orange, yellow, hues, it's pitted. What is actually going on on the surface of I to give you that? But the moldy pizza look. What's there? It is because of volcanic activity. There's a gravitational tug of war between Jupiter and the other moons that are close by the three other Galilean moons in particular. The strange thing is you've got an internal temperature. That's racked up by gravitational tug of war and Jupiter in its moons. But you then also have cold surface temperatures. You end up with a lot of internal churning with high temperatures, spurts out up to 300 kilometer higher eruptions that we've seen so far. And settles down as this smelly rotten egg sulfur snow, because it's very cold on the surface of this alien moon. That is about the same size as our moon, with 400 active volcanoes by recent estimates. Yeah, that's really not a pizza I want delivered anytime soon. Sulfur flakes, not really into that. Yeah, I mean either. But you know, this is a problem when you have lots of very large moons that are close together. They're literally being pulled apart by these huge gravitational forces coming from more kinds of different directions. And that means loads of tectonic movement, which heats up the core and leads to huge volcanic eruptions. So if we had more than one moon, there would be volcanic hellscapes covered in deadly chemicals. Quite possibly yes. And I guess that is a bit of a drawback. Yeah, well, it turns out that that's not even the worst of it. Astrophysicist Neil Cummins has spent quite a lot of time imagining and plotting what could happen if we had two moons. In fact, he wrote a book called What If The Earth Had Two Moons? So what if the Earth did have two moons? Well, the result would be, let's just say sub-optimal. Okay, let's imagine that there were two moons had formed. And let's imagine that one of them was half the distance of the other. And then what would happen to that three-body system, the Earth and its two moons? Well, in a system with an Earth-sized planet and two big moons, the closer moon would spiral away from the Earth faster than the farther moon until the two moons would collide. And that could be a mess you wouldn't want to be there. Yeah, I was just thinking that this doesn't sound good. Admittedly, I am no astrophysicist, but this sounds bad to me. You could ruin your whole day. Bit of an understatement there. Yeah, you could say that. So instead of these stable orbits like I.O. and the Javian moons, depending on how big the moons were and how far away they were, we would pretty much end up in a mighty catastrophic bust up. And if you think that's bad, here is an alternative take from Brendan on what two moons could mean for life on Earth. So we think dinosaurs were wiped out by massive impacts, usually thinking of things that stray in like an asteroid or a comet. But if we have more than one moon, maybe that moon actually instead of going away, if it's too close, may actually spiral inwards and crash into the Earth and wipe out life. I'm half of one moon. I think. Let's stick with the one. Let's see, I'm half of one moon. So, Dr. Ardford, when it comes to how the moon affects life on Earth, can we say case-solved? Well, Dr. Fry, the moon helped to seed and stir the oceans from which life emerged. And by controlling how far the Earth spins, the moon determines the length of our day. But life might not be quite so dandy if we had more than one. It could be a volcanic hillhole, like Jupiter's moon, I.O. Or spiral inwards to crash into our planet and wipe out life. So let's just be thankful for our beautiful solitary moon. Finally. Right, there you go. What if we had two moons? The answer. Bad things. Bad things. Really bad things. Actually, one other thing that I quite like about the moon is just how perfectly balanced everything ends up. Like, I mean, it's quite, you know, so if the moon was a different distance away from us, right, or slightly bigger or smaller, then we wouldn't get these perfect cellular clipses. It just so happens that the size of the moon in our sky is almost exactly the same size as the sun. So when we have those eclipses, they perfectly cover each other up. I don't have a weird fluke, right? You have some sort of zen moment, sir, that you just said, ballad, there's balance in the universe. The thing, it's perfectly balanced. And if it moves away, then bad things will happen. It's just cool, though, isn't it? It's cool. It's just, it is just, the distance from the Earth to the moon is, that's not coincidence, that's physics, yeah, Newtonian mechanics. But the fact that the moon and the sun are the same size in the sky, that's just, that's just blind luck. You know what, though, actually, do you know I've just been, do you know what I got back from yesterday? Well, I do, no, and I'm insanely jealous. I went to NASA. Oh my god. Which one? Should we be into NASA? I've been to one NASA base. I went to Ames, which is the one in near Stanford in California. What did they do there? They mostly do research now, but it's like, it was, oh god, it's beautiful. It was one of those built in the 50s, I think, based on an earlier Air Force base in the 30s. They do some research. They do some synthetic biology research there. But the really cool thing is they've got these dirigible sheds. I don't know what that word means. So they're rigid zeppelands, which they started building in the 1930s, I think, from memory. And they never used. Zeppelands is in like the airship. Yes. Yes. So there's these two ridiculously large sheds on this airfield. And they can't take them down because they're built with a spest or something, so they're there permanently. Can they use them? I don't think they do. But they're just, they're just ridiculously cool. They just remind, it's sort of 50s optimism of what was possible. That's Ames is this beautiful place where you just go, yeah, these guys were real dreamers. But you didn't go to Ames, you went to... I didn't go to Ames. No, I went to the Jet Propulsion Lab. Oh my god, that's the coolest place on Earth! Yeah, it was pretty cool. It's where they're building the real Mars rover. So I got to go in like, didn't get to go in the clean room, apparently I'm not clean enough. Got to look at the clean room. Which Mars rover is this? The new one, Mars 2020. Yes. They also had like mock-ups of curiosity, Mars curiosity there. So kind of like driving around on what I can only describe as Mars robot wars. Nice. But I also got to go to Houston to the, you know, I know that was really cool. That's like... And I got to meet lots of astronauts and hang around with them and drive their spaceship simulators. So astronauts here are fascinating bunch of people. Who did you get to start talking to? I got to meet Doug Wheelock, total legend, and Sonny Williams as well. Sonny Williams is brilliant. I mean, okay. The thing is, right, is that like a lot of people do quite fall in over astronauts, right? They're like, the astronauts here, the astronauts here. You know, they sort of shoot them like movie stars in a way. But unlike movie stars, they are actually superhuman. Yeah. Yeah, they actually do really hard stuff. Really hard stuff. I mean, really clever. So I mean, they like, you know, the best engineers, mathematicians, they're all fluent in Russian. They all fly Blumin helicopters, you know, with their eyes closed. Zoom, they unbelievably brave, incredibly physically strong, and just all actually really nice people. Pretty superhuman. Sonny to Williams is, I mean, she's completely legendary. She's extremely, extremely cool. She's extremely cool. Doug Wheelock as well, I really liked him. So he flies black hawks and a patches and all the stuff has like been the commander of the ISS. He was giving me a lesson in one of the space exploration vehicles. They're the Mars buggy, basically. The one that's built for humans. So I got to kind of drive it around. And the whole time, it was just, you know, in awe of this incredible man and what he's achieved and what he can do. But my favorite bit of the day was right at the end. He'd taken a few photos on his phone during the day. And I asked him to air drop them to me. And that's helping him to do the air drop. You can do it. Can fly a space shuttle. Can't do basic smartphone tech. Nice. It doesn't really happen. Maybe really happy. But you know, chink in their armor. Yeah. So are they all gearing up for the all the anniversary celebrations for Apollo 11? Yes, exactly. Which is the reason why I went. But the other thing is there's a new, rather than the space shuttle, there's a new starliner, a new shuttle that's going to bring astronauts up from the states up to the ISS. So they're kind of getting ready for the launch of that as well. That's happening. That's really happening. Yeah, man. And I got to drive the simulator and like dock it at the ISS in their training. It seemed really cool. Your current physical state is atypical for an astronaut. You have a rather prominent bump. Yeah, not many, not many astronauts are eight months pregnant. Right. One hundred and one hundred and one hundred and one hundred and one. I don't think so. No. Could you strap it in all right? To date. No, count for that. No, but you know what though. They do sell astronaut baby grows. So, you know, you got one. Obviously. Nice. Well, that sounds, that sounds lovely for you. Not in any way, jealous of the fact you got to hang around and drive Mars Buggies and hang out with astronauts. You know, did they have two moons? Which we had. We had two moons. So in some ways, that's twice as good. Yeah, we don't want two moons. They're doing it. We want we only want one. You know what actually, when I was interviewing Brendan doing this, my favorite thing ever was he was talking about absolute catastrophic disaster. But doing it in this really lovely Irish accent. You know, it was very gentle. It was normal. Global tsunamis. I'm not going to do it. I tend to accent because you did the accents on the screen. I'd toyed you way of terror. It was the description of one of the moons of, I think it was, you're in a series who's talking about when he said it was, he went in a roly-poly pattern. That is a technical scientific term. Don't write in. Roly-poly around the thundering of. And as accents are back, it's only been three episodes since we've done accents. I know, you know what they, I think it's probably time to introduce our curio of the week. Curious occasion, the list, curious totaling machine. Rather than a prize curio of the week. Okay, so just a quick reminder for the curios, you can, if you choose to vote for us in the British podcast awards, the listeners choice category. You know, you don't use those shoes. You don't have to, but we would really like to. We have to. You do have to. Yes. Maybe we should just double down. No, you have to. You do have to. If you're going to listen to this program, if you're going to listen to this program, I think it's important that you support us. And then we're going. Yes. And that means going to Britishpodcastswars.com. For us, last vote. I don't actually mean that. But anyway, but you do because you're ultra competitive and you want to win something. Anyway, listen, curio of the week, this week is all based on, on my being hypnotized and coming up with the least original comic character of all time. Raccoon Badger Tailed Canadian Man from our hypnosis episode. We have got three contenders, for curio of the week, this week. All three of them are sketches of Raccoon Man. We don't actually have a name for Canadian Raccoon Badger Tail Man. Now, the first comes from Neil Cameron. Now, Neil Cameron is a professional artist. He draws comics. He writes for the Phoenix magazine. He created the great comic characters, Robo Mega Bros. And he tweeted to us, minutes after the program went out, the latest curious case is amazing and hilarious. Thank you, Neil. After listening, I felt moved to draw. And the mother of a, standing under hypnosis superhero creation, the Raccoon. So as his image, he's got a beautiful yellow background. I mean, this is seriously professional, right? You got a, well, a man-sized Raccoon, very musily, quite hairy. Badger tail, moustache, obviously, goes that saying, carrying the Canadian flag. And it's, it's titled with the barely believable Raccoon. See, I think because Neil is a professional comic book artist, I am now going to be disappointed if this doesn't become an actual strip and recurring. He's even got a little spider. He's a cool spider in the corner, because that's not. Do you need to get this done as a print and put it on your wall? I'm going to, that's amazing. That is amazing. But a second one came in and this one is from Steve Dowling, aged 0 times 29. Yeah. I don't know what that means. I mean, the, what is 0 times 29? He says, dear doctors of other film fry, I believe that I have discovered the origins of Adams, highly original character. It's more derivative than we first thought. I think he based it on his self as the attached image shows. I looked up at Badger tail. It's really dull in relation to Raccoon's, which makes the fact that it's all about the tail. Even funnier. So here's image and all of these pictures are going to be posted on the website to have a look for them in the gallery. He's drawn over one of the photos of me from our profiles. But replace my t-shirt with a Canadian maple leaf. And next to it is, well, it's not, see the thing is, it's really good, but it's not actually what I describe. It is a raccoon wearing a Canadian t-shirt with a mastage. There are striking similarities there between your face and the racoon's face. He's also got the spider there. He's got the spider as well. He's got the detail. So that's from Steve Dowling, who is 0 times 29 years old. But the final one comes in, and this is from Amelie Zanakis. And she says, Amelie says, I'm 11 years old now, but I've been trying to become Curie of the wig. That's her spelling. He's got 11 ease in it. I saw my chance when Dr. Rutherford got hypnotised. I liked drawing a lot. So whilst listening to the explanation of raccoon, I drew this. Right, and you need to do the next bit. Then, so I will try and get the correct number of O's, A's and D's in this. So... Da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da, I resent raccoon. Now, Amelie's picture is, I've got to say, this is what was in my head. Right, so because this is a proper, this is like one of the classic Marvel front pages. It's got all of the Jack Kirby style. The raccoon man is in the middle. He's got some very tight speed O's on. He's wearing a red costume. This is an extremely excellent drawing. It's got raccoon as a big strap across the earth. The Canadian flag, I think raccoon might be on the moon here. No, I think he's in Canada, actually. Well, it says, it's got... It's got the earth sort of spinning in the background. Yeah. Just hiding behind the big raccoon banner. It's got a map of the world on it. She's done a little arrow saying, not Canada. Question more to a strange shaped blob on the map. Yeah, but raccoon man is extremely mussely and then standing very proudly, hands-on hips in front of the Canadian flag. He's also a lovely detail here. She's given him raccoon feet as well. I love that. Little three toes with claws on them. Listen, all three of you, including professional comic book artists, Neil Cameron, you are are. I think we can... Are you giving three badges? Yeah. Goodness. I think so. The generosity you show on occasion is quite my bugging. A bit of raccoon. There's a PS for a memory here as well. She says, I was sort of happy that you kept the old jingle, but I got quite sad when you said you were changing it. We didn't actually change it in the end. Because each time we listen to your podcast as a family of four, we sing along to the sticky song. And my super shy little sister sings and dances and looks really happy. Oh. Yeah. I like this idea. I love that idea of everyone dancing around to the beat too. But not as much as I love Canadian raccoon guy as visualized by Neil Cameron, Amalese, Zennakis and Steve Dowing. So you're all the Curie of the Week. There we go. Right, that's all we've got time for. This week, next week we are back with our final episode in the current series all about dinosaurs. Beyond Today is the Daily Podcast from Radio 4. It asks one big question about one big story in the news and beyond. Just how big is Netflix? Why are young people getting lost in the system? I'm Tina DeHeeley. I'm Matthew Price. And along with the team of curious producers, we are searching for answers that change the way we see the world. I was actually quite shocked by how many people this issue affects. So we're doing stories about technology, about identity. Are you trying to look black? No. I am not trying to look black. Power. Where power lies, how it's changing. And every weekday we speak to the smartest people in the BBC and beyond. It's basically what I've been wanting to do since I was little. Let's talk about business, economics. And the stories started forming in my head. That's what I've learned. It's okay to feel. Subscribe to us on BBC Sounds. And join in on the hashtag Beyond Today.
