Hello and welcome to the final episode in series three of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fragg. I have been incredibly unprofessional and not checked out what the title of this programme is. Oh, it's a good one. Oh, here we go, here we go. Oh, no, hang on, we've got an awe. I think this means we can choose, I don't know. Okay. The option one, infantile amnesia. The curious case of infantile amnesia. Or the curious case of the forgetful child. Definitely the latter. It's definitely the number two. I mean, that sounds like an act of the Christy. The facts that Michelle would even bother putting that first one on is insulting. Michelle. Michelle's our producer. She's brilliant. Normally. Normally, this is, this is an uncharacteristic slip of hers, I see. Michelle, in this case, you've let us down, you've let Dr. Fry down. I think to be honest, you should be ashamed. You've shamed the BBC. I'm sorry, listeners. I'm sorry, the millions of podcast faithful. Michelle is wonderful in so many regards, but the infantile amnesia. It's definitely a black mark against the name now. It is. We are beings are cast. Just in case there's any doubt about this, Michelle's completely brilliant. Anyway, it is the final episode in series five. There will be a series six coming in June. Question mark. We'll wait to Michelle. Is it June, Michelle? It's June. So that means that you have to send us even more questions, sensible ones, not sensible. I quite like the quote. I'm quite like the, you know, wacky out there ones. Yes. There are a lot of fun. Send them to curiouscasesatbbc.co.uk and in the meantime, on with the show. Welcome to the final episode in this series of What's It Called Again? The curious cases of brother for number nine is it. Series six is coming soon enough, sending your puzzlements to, what's the email address again? Honestly, how many times will you forget this? It's curiouscasesatbbc.co.uk. That is it. All right. Shall we get on with it? Yes. Let's do that. Shall we? A simple and intriguing question today from David Fulger from Cheltenham's spot. Yes, he asks, why can't we remember the first few years of our lives? Or even what we meant to be doing today. I do find that quite tricky. So what was your first memory, Doctor Fry? I think I was about three years old and I was at playgroup and one of the childminders there had blue eyeshadow on all the way up to her eyebrows and I remember wondering what was wrong with her. Yes, 1980s were a confusing time for everyone I think, but why can't you remember further back? I asked Catherine Lovedate from the University of Westminster, where the psychologists have investigated this strange phenomenon. Yeah, it is very well known. It's called infantile amnesia, so none of us really have any memories from before the age of two or three. Two is probably the earliest stage, so some people don't have first memories until they're maybe even four or five. What's your first memory? It was doing the washing up at the age of what I think was two and a half and what I remember thinking to myself is I'm only two and a half and I'm doing the washing up. And your memory of doing the washing up, is that sort of typical? They're very varied actually. They usually seem to be something significant and obviously in that particular case it was meaningful to me because I suppose I felt I was doing something really grown up, but people might remember maybe the first time they fell off their bike, but it often tends to be something that's significant to them in some way. I remember eating rice paper at a birthday party when I must have been about three and it was a sort of, it was a joke that we were eating paper. I remember what the rest of the party was like, but again, I suppose significant because it was birthday unusual. And significant because it's an unusual thing to do to eat paper, so as an adult we wouldn't particularly remember that, but as a child that's really weird. Not that weird for you, I don't know, I saw you eating paper just last week. Anyway, the average age of our first memory is around three years and four months, but it's Catherine pointed out. Some people can remember all the way back from when they were two, but all of us can remember some things before we turn to, right? So my two-month-old daughter knows who I am and Toddlers recognise where they live. Yes, yes, but what we're talking about here is difference. What we're talking about is episodic memory, which is remembering specific events, so these could be times or places or maybe how we felt at a particular time. Okay, well, if we're going to investigate how we remember, let's start with how we forget. In the late 19th century, German memory pioneer Hermann Ebinghaus devised an experiment to test just that. He taught himself hundreds of lists of nonsense words. Rie, ze, zopp, cos, nieke. Then measured how long it took him to re-learn the list after different periods of time, from about 20 minutes to a month. Rie, ze, zopp, cos, dies er verter sind non-sens verter. What he found was that how we forget is entirely predictable. The forgetting curve, as he called it, is exponential. We forget rapidly at first and then the rate gradually decreases. So for those of us who stop learning German after school, the number of words we remember declines quickly in the first year, but then the rate of forgetting slows down. Naturally, my in-hition. But what has this got to do with our question? Why can't we remember the first few years of our lives? Well, another thing that Ebinghaus discovered was that this forgetting curve changes with age and that children forget much more quickly. Now, that is definitely true. My son, who is nine, can't remember what he had for lunch, sometimes while he's eating lunch. But what's happening inside our bodies that creates this infantile amnesia, as it's called? His Catherine Love Data explain. The brain is developing incredibly quickly. So in the first couple of years of life, we're making new connections so quickly that a one-year-old brain has almost more connections than any other point in its life. And one of the necessary parts of brain development is that it starts to prune itself. It gets rid of some of those connections just like you might prune a tree to try and make it grow more healthily. And in that pruning process, we possibly lose memories. So it might be that the brain is actually, it is forming those memories, but then you go through this process of neural pruning and those structures are lost. Yes, but also a lot of people have shown that we need language. So if we have language, if we can describe something that happens to us, then that helps to bed in the memory and to make it stick. And so some people have shown that we can't remember things involving a particular concept until we can understand what it is. So a memory involving, say, a bicycle, we might have that quite early on, but a memory involving something more mature, like, say, disgust. We know that children don't really develop that concept until they're about five. So we've also shown that people don't tend to have memories that involve disgust before that time. Okay, so the idea is that we can't encode the memory before we have a linguistic concept for every bit of information. That's right. And that was one of the criticisms of Ebbinghaus's work that it's much harder to remember a nonsense word than one that actually has meaning. Then there's this other complementary theory about brain development. We know that the hippocampus is key to encoding and storing these episodic memories and that doesn't mature until we're older. Okay, that always sounds perfectly logical, but how on earth then do you explain the following case studies that I came across? My earliest memory was waking up in my cot. I can see the curtains above me and they're yellow and I can hear somebody in the room next to me, splashing around, obviously having a shave or something. And the house that we were in, I left when I was two, so I'll have to be under two. My earliest memory is lying on my back inside what must have been, I think, one of those big parameters with the hood up and bedclothes up to my chin. And I'm fairly sure I remember the sky as blue, but I didn't have the word blue. I was really very little. Ooh, this is a bit like that bed in Sherlock where he sees all the clues floating in front of him, a cot with bars on and a pram and it was before they could speak. So this seems to suggest that these small people were younger than two. Good god man, you're a genius. Yes. And I think that second voice was the novelist A.S. Byot as well. Yes, it was. Well, these memories were gathered as part of a BBC Radio 4 project 10 years ago called the memory experience and they had 6,000 people who took part in their online survey conducted by psychologist Martin Conway from City University. We asked people to describe to us their very first memory. And then they answered various questions about that memory in particular. How old were you? 40% of the samples gave us a memory that they claimed dated to when they were 24 months or younger. And then another 861 gave us a memory which they dated to below the age of 12 months. We were shocked. Gosh. And were there even, I mean, I've heard stories that people claiming they can remember being bored? Were there any of those? No, there weren't any of those although we have come across those in other work we've done. I mean, they even had somebody who wants to claim to remember being in the philopean tube and we pointed out that once they we did know about memory was you needed a nervous system before you could have any memories. Does the micely, I think we can probably agree that some of those, some of those probably aren't quite true. What does that mean for the people who responded in the survey that they had a memory lower than before the age of two? Well, you might remember some fragments from childhood or you might know something about your childhood. Your mother might have said to you, you won't remember but I used to push you around in a really big green pram and that person remembers this green pram and perhaps they form a mental image of it. And gradually in their mind this knowledge coalesces into a form that they experience as a memory and now this person remembers this green pram that their mother used to push them around. Based upon knowledge of childhood, their own childhood and based upon maybe one or two remembered fragments and for them that becomes their earliest memory. Now, I can imagine quite a few of our listeners are raising an eyebrow, shall we say, at these sort of explanations that these are fictional memories if they happened before the age of two. How can you be so sure? Well, we can't be and it may be that some of them are true. We can't rule out exceptional cases and we don't rule them out but on balance the probability is extremely high that they're not true. So what we're saying here is that these 40% of people who say that they can recall being babies including the Booker Prize winning novelist AS Buyett, basically they're making it all up. Isn't that what novelists do though? I suppose it is. That's not quite what Marta's saying to be fair. He's calling these fictional memories but it's not that people are intentionally lying here because some elements of their memory might well be true but it's likely that we've added in extra bits of information as time's gone on. See it's funny you say that because I've often wondered whether I can really trust my own early memories. Aren't we all just making them up? I checked with Catherine Love Day. So without turning this into a sort of session with a psychiatrist, I've got a particular sense of my own false memories which is that I can recall incidents involving people and pets at times when they couldn't have been present. I can think of holidays when I was 14 where my littlest brother who wasn't born until I was 16 was definitely present. Now do I need help? No absolutely everybody does it and in fact the fact that you are aware that you do it is probably more unusual. A lot of people will just have those memories for things they think are memories and believe that they're real. We all do it because we are putting together that memory using the information that we've got to hand and sometimes those bits and pieces can get muddled up. If you're trying to remember something that involves family holidays then probably generically they involved your brother and so your generic memory of a holiday has those things in it. So when you remember a specific moment you put those things back in it because that's how memory works it's the way that we can be efficient about memory. So if we aren't prone to having these false memories how reliable is our memory overall? Can it be trusted? Well it's a very important question and I think on the whole yes of course we can trust our memories and certainly general memories knowing where we live and knowing things that have happened to us but very specific moments it's almost inevitable that there will be details in there that are not 100% accurate but it doesn't matter. Memory isn't just about everything being accurate it's about making us who we are and socialise and connect with people and so in a sense the memories we have are the ones that we need to exist in the world. So Dr Fry the question why can't we remember the first few years of our lives? Case solved? Yes the average age for our first memory is three years and four months. Because before that our brains haven't developed the ability to store autobiographical memories. However around 40% of people say they can record things that happened when they were babies. But they may not be true recollections they're just misty water coloured memories of the way we were. I don't think we need to forget that that just happened. And that was the end of series five where basically you had to hear me sing is that a lane page? Yeah although my favourite bit was you doing the German voices. I was particularly pleased in I did do proper German at school. One thing I think about this episode actually given that I now have kids and you've got kids as well of course. Many. You have no idea as a parent at what moment they're going to have their first memory. So it could be something good to do something very dramatic. It could just be you coming down to breakfast one day in your pants. That could be it. You've got from the age of three you've got to be really careful that you don't do anything embarrassing in front of them. You're suggesting that I just go down to breakfast in my pants? I have no doubt that you are do that and many other embarrassing things. We just described in that episode our earliest memories and they're both incredibly trivial and they are really. Yes. A bit of blue eye makeup in a childminder and eating rice paper. I do actually also remember they another very element I couldn't work out which one was earlier was my dad you know you get those little playpen's basically like child cages. My dad in one of those upside down pretending to be a tiger. That's quite a nice warm memory. That's very strange. So yeah so maybe that might be one of your kids first memories is you doing something silly for them? Yeah maybe. Although another early memory of mine was my dad had a beard because it was a 70s. He had a big bushy beard for a whole time of the hipster. Well yeah they went away in the 80s when they came back now but he had a big bushy hips to beard and he shaved it off one day when I was little like remember the house story and I remember the bathroom. He came out of the bathroom without his beard that I'd known all of his life and me and my elder sister. We were terrified and we were bursting tears because he didn't have a beard. So there's the lesson don't have beard people. They traumatise young children and I will never have a beard for that reason. I know. Also that you can't grow one but whatever. Okay do not forget to send us in your scientific mysteries that you like us to investigate to curious cases at BBC.co.uk. Yes and there's loads of extra information and articles by me and by her and by them and there's animations and tons of cool stuff that we so much cool stuff that we can't even remember what it is. No but just I know there's lots of it. It's not the memory issue and I kind of remember where it is. I know where it is it's BBC.com forward slash future. So you are much younger than me which means your memory is like a glistening snow globe perched on the mantle piece of our mind like the way we were. Let's just fade out. Let's just fade out.
