Welcome to the podcast of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. And this is episode two. The curious case of the phantom jam. Just fitting on your own sound effects on your voice, that. Yes, there's no reverb on that at all. This is an interesting one for us. Not jam, like you put on toast. Exactly, this is the one in which I got to drive my terrible car around the M25 while you were still in bed. What time in the morning did you have to get up to go traffic hunting on the M25? It was about 515 and I had to drive out and pick out. I lovely producer Michelle who's sitting over there whilst you were what do you do lounging around? I think just completely asleep for another five hours or so, I'd say. Anyway, the phantom jam. Yes. Today we bring you the curious case of the phantom jam. Dear doctors, Rutherford and Fry writes, Mr Matthew Chandler from Derbyshire, I travel on the motorway for work and I often find myself sitting in traffic jams for ages, thinking that there must be road works or an accident ahead. And then suddenly the jam mysteriously disappears to reveal nothing. There's no apparent reason whatsoever. Why, God dammit, why? Why indeed. Well, we have pledged to solve your everyday questions using the power of science and solve this one we will. I've got a real treat for you. Oh, that's very exciting. To really tackle this problem, I think we need to carry out some field research. And so with that in mind, I know a superb transport researcher who's going to take you traffic hunting. I love field work. Right, 5 past seven is fairly dark. I can't find third gear because my car is rubbish. And along my way to the M25, which is the most jammed, motorway in the country, I must be the only person right now who's trying to find traffic jams rather than trying to avoid them. Anyway, I'm going to the Clacket Lane service stations, just off junction 5. And I'm going to meet Neil Howard. I'm sure I was a very nice man, but I'm not in a very good mood. He's from the transport research laboratory. And we are in search of traffic jams. I haven't seen. Oh, f***, taken a wrong turn. Hold on a minute. I'm going to go to that station and turn around. Oh. It was fun, right? No, not at all. And sorry about the swearing listeners. Low level road rage incidents may occur during this program. But the thing is, your day could have been a lot worse because imagine you were stuck in the longest lasting traffic jam in the world. How long do you reckon that was? I know, six hours, seven days. Actually, 12 days. 12 days. On the Beijing Tibet Expressway, went back for 62 miles the backup. Or a particularly stressful traffic jam was when people were trying to escape hurricane reters approach in Texas. 99 miles the tail back went for. People ended up moving about 10 miles in nine hours. That's not a traffic jam. That's a city. That's a conurbation. I mean, how many people were involved in a 90 mile tail back? 2.5 million. You've got all the stuff today. I know, I've completed my research. All right, so admittedly, my woes of yesterday were not as bad as that. Anyway, it's back to the delightful M25 for me to try and get to the bottom of why traffic jams. OK, Neil, hello. Hello. This is Neil Howard and we've met at the trackit lane service stations, which is just delightful. Super fun times, right? Yes, it is. It's not raining. Even better, we're now going to go and find a traffic jam. On the M25. Glamour job. Let's go. Oh, you can be quiet for starters, Jim Nockers' eat. So we're one mile outside of the Clackett Lane service station and we have reached a standstill with just beginning to move. Somewhere ahead of us is some kind of seat point, some kind of situation where the traffic is being puturbed, is the best way to try being here. I mean, an obvious one is things like lots of other vehicles joining the motorway. So we were stationary and now we're back up to normal speed limit and nothing has happened. There was no crash, there was no junction. We, it's just now free-flowing. And so how does that work? That's a weird thing, but it's basically a shock wave of traffic moving backwards down the carriageway. What happens is that at one point, everyone slows down a little bit and if everyone slows down a little bit, all the people behind them have to slow down as well. This traffic shock wave works just like a wave pushing through a slinky spring. One by one, each car in the line slows down, creating a concertina effect that moves backwards down the motorway. And if you look at jams from above, you can see the shock wave travelling in the opposite direction to the traffic. And the strange thing is that no matter what motorway you're on or what speed you're travelling at, the shock wave always moves backwards at approximately 12 miles an hour. Now this is a result of the fact that you can only fit so many cars on the road and in the end we all have a certain standard, comfortable distance that we like to keep doing the cars in front of us. And if you put these two together with a simple bit of mass, the universal rule of 12 miles an hour pops out. So this car is just changing from the slower lane and pulling in front of me, but as a result I did have to take my foot off the accelerator a bit, which means I'm now slowing. And is that the type of event that cumulatively becomes a shock wave? Yes, it can do, but it depends on how saturated the traffic is. If there's a huge queue of cars behind you and you slow down, that will have an effect on the cars behind you, and that might well multiply. See this guy's just pulled in front of me with two spaces there, and he didn't indicate. Use your indicator. Mazda City, 17 kilometers southeast from the center of Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates, a vision for all future cities is taking shape. Oh, Mazda City Adam, designed from the ground up as a jam-free heaven. Sadly, our budget didn't quite stretch to this Middle Eastern utopia. This is viewed by many as one of the world's most exciting developments. Yes, yes, Mazda City Man. Mazda City is one of the most radical solutions to traffic congestion ever attempted. Also, they claim the transport flows beneath the city while the pedestrians move around above. Mazda City will feature the first large-scale zero-emission transportation system, a subway of personalized, driverless electric vehicles who carry people and freight. A ground-level light rail system at a subterranean metro high-speed train keep the Mazda citizens well connected. It's a very interesting kind of idea how successful it's been is still open to debate. Sadly, though, as BBC Technology reporter Jane Wakefield reveals, Mazda City hasn't quite been going to plan. So it's talked about a lot as a great model for how a city should be, but it's not working as a fool on the city would. You know, it's outside of the main city, and there's not that many people living there, and also it was expensive. So phase one of the building work, whether the cars go underneath and the pedestrian areas are above, sounds lovely, but it's very expensive. So everybody likes the idea of this wonderfully green waste-free city, where pedestrians and traffic are separated and there's no congestion, but in reality, it's not actually what we're looking for. I think this is the problem with all smart cities, and it's suspected that in phase two, they might go back to the normal design because it's just unsustainable, but they also have these pods, driver of pods, which drive people around, which is coming to the UK, would you believe, Milton Keynes will have its very own driverless pods on the roads, or actually on the pavements to be precise later this year. Again, they've had to think very carefully about the design, and actually they call it the personality of their cars, so that they don't upset pass us by, and I think they're going to have little voices, sort of might say, move out of the way and kind of talk to pedestrians, because the last thing we want is these new technology coming on board and immediately running people over, that's not a great start. I mean, it would be less than ideal. Yes. So Hannah, apart from Mazda City Man's beautiful intonation, you want to move out to the Middle East just to hear him talk in this incredible voice, pouring velvet into your ears. Yeah, the honey-d velvet into your ears. Apart from that, this is fairly radical, the idea that we can get rid of cars and we all drive around in pods. That's not going to work. No, and this whole thing arises because drivers are overreacting to what's going on around them, breaking too harshly. If people learnt to drive better, we wouldn't necessarily need quite such a radical solution. Well, you just heard me on the M25 with some idiot hole just cutting me up without indicating. So that was, in fact, what I put to our traffic expert, Neil Harwood. If everyone drove, kept maintaining a safe distance, which I really do sound like a driving instructor now, but maintained a safe distance with a car in front and assuming that nothing, you know, a badger didn't run out or there was a crash in front, then you wouldn't get this constipation effect. No, you wouldn't. And that brings us onto what the currently calling semi-autonomous vehicles, or platoons of vehicles that communicate with each other. So what you have is a situation where there is a vehicle in front and you're going in the same direction as them on the same motorway for a long period of time, you sneak in behind them and then take control of your car, which sounds ludicrous. But what it effectively makes is you end up with a little train of vehicles driving down the road, all as one contiguous unit. And therefore that concertinaing effect where you're reacting half a second behind the car in front of you no longer exists. So is the solution to driving buffoonery simply to remove the buffoons? Maybe driverless robot vehicles are the solution to traffic jams we've been waiting for. A machine can probably drive better than a human. We have a lot of accidents caused by human error. It's kind of how we get there that's the problem because machines and people driving normally don't necessarily go together. So we have situations in California where Google's driverless cars, for instance, are being pulled over by the cops because they're driving too slowly and causing a massive tailback. Because these driverless cars want to drive by the rules of the road and unfortunately humans don't. And by the rules of the road does that include leaving a two-second gap between you and the car in front? All of those things that would be in the highway code, then that's exactly how a driverless car goes. So now they're actually interestingly looking at making these cars a little bit more aggressive, because whilst they still have humans on the road driving alongside them, they have to not leave these massive gaps because if you leave a massive gap then a human is going to slip into that gap. I probably inevitably cause problems a bit further back. Exactly. I was in San Francisco last year and I was driving along and one of the Google driverless cars drove past me. Now they have to have people in the front seats who can take over if anything should happen. But I just thought it was terribly amazing because I was really gawping. I wound down the window and sort of waived at this guy who was sitting reading a book in front of his next steering wheel and then he did the best thing. He just gave me a double thumbs up, which was just a sort of driverless car joke. Kind of gives it away, doesn't it? Yeah, but I'm quite in favour of the idea of driverless cars. But there is a conundrum within that, which is that I like driving. I like accelerating. I prefer being driven too much at first. I like being in control of the car and I wouldn't want to relinquish that to Mazda city man. Well, no, but driverless cars could cure traffic dams if we all had them. Right, but the bad news is that in the meantime we're mixing robots and humans, which means that things will probably get worse before they get better. And that's dear listeners, just about wraps it up for today's case. Thank you for your interest and attention. So, Dr. Frye, can we conclude? Case solved? Yes. Phantom jams are caused by all those dastardly drivers who spontaneously slow down on the motorway, causing a traffic shock wave that moves backwards at approximately 12 miles an hour. And next time, Dr. Frye, you're getting up at 6am to drive on the flipping motorway. Thank you for listening to the curious cases of Rutherford and Frye. This programme was made in collaboration with BBC Future. This was produced by Michelle Martin at the Bear, at the Bear, at the Bear, at the Bear, at the Bear, at the Bear, at the Bear, at the Bear, at the Bear, 47 other people based on an original idea by the Bear, at the Bear, at the Bear, at the Bear. We just did it. Yeah, we just did it. We basically, we just did it. So, that's free in a room. If you, dear listener, have your own curious case that you would like us to investigate, then you can email us at curiouscases at bbc.co.uk. And if you go to bbc.com forward slash future, there will be posting videos and other things to do with the show. Thanks for listening.
