It is recording. We are going. You can sing. La la la la la la. I think as evidence by this episode, though, it's probably best if I stay away from singing. La la la la la. Because this is the curious case of, wait, what's it called? The tone deaf person. Mum. Whaa. The melodic mystery. Right, name, Michelle. Very good name. We've got some good names coming up. This is the brand new series of the curious cases of me, Dr. Rutherford and me, Dr. Henfheim. And I'm pretty excited. I'm not going to lie to you. This is what we've all been waiting for. It is all year. Well, since the last series, which is also this year. Actually, we do have some genuine, liberally in cases in this series. Five coming up in the next five days or five podcasts as you, the very special podcasts listeners are listening, starting today with the curious case of Hannah not being able to hold a tune at all. Henf's my singing at the beginning. Yes, indeed. I think I'm never going to sing again. I'm just going to pretend, mouth along. That's what I'm going to do from now on, even in, you know, carol singing, situations, et cetera. So that's today's show. The first in the series four of the curious cases, we also got coming up. We have a maths double just at a piece, Hannah and her maths face. Yeah, a hunt for nothing. We also have, I mean, one episode kind of looking at things I'm bad at. One episode also looking at things that Michelle has mad at, namely finding her way around. Finding her way to the studio. We record in the same studio, dear podcast listeners, every single show. For years, she's been working here. Twelve years, I think it is. Still turns out of the lift goes the wrong way. Dozing in Cable. Yes, that's coming up later in this series. We also, at the end of the last episode, we have a bloopers reel, if you will, which is maybe, oh, I haven't heard it yet, actually, but I think it should give you some insight into just how professional me and Adam are. Deeply, deeply professional working science communicators. And I think this really is plenty of evidence for that. Can we agree more? At the end of episode five. Yes, indeed. But now it's time for episode one. Our theme tune is ridiculously catchy. I know, but do you know what? I think you were a little bit flat then, a bit out of key. I'm rude. Not all of us have a natural gift. Well, here is our curious case for today. Simon Forset asks, my dad, my two sisters, and I can pitch a note fairly well. My mum is tone deaf. I have controls at ability, and can I do anything to ensure my son can at least carry a tune? OK, Hannah, how's your singing? I would say it's below average. Below average. I can't believe it. That pity. See, I was a chorister at school. Were you really? I was. I was a bass. Sing me one note as a bass. Blah. You sound like an angel, I do. I do. You too could sound that angelic, Hannah. If only you did a little bit of practice. So I figured that given that normally I'm the one who has to do the unpleasant experiments on curious cases, I have arranged for you to have a singing lesson, a singing lesson with singing coach extraordinaire Michael Bonshaw. Really? Yes, I did. So I usually start by just trying to get a little bit of a feel for your own vocal history. Yeah. What might have made you think that you're not a brilliant singer? I think in part it is my terrible voice. That is a bit of a giveaway. Okay, and this is your own opinion. Yeah, the opinion of myself and the neighbourhood cats. Okay. And when you listen to yourself, do you think you're not in tune or you just think it doesn't sound very nice? All of the above. All, okay. Yes, I think it's quite difficult to hit the note that is intended. Okay. I think it's also quite difficult to know what note I'm intending to hit anyway. Okay. So your sense of direction is sort of... Yes, it's like a... Yes. Yes, okay. I have a friend who sings in a choir. Yes. And he says that he enjoys it so much and finds it so beautiful that sometimes he finds himself spontaneously crying whenever he hits a strong note. That is the bar that I'm setting for today's singing lesson. Oh, okay. I will try not to make you cry unless it's in a good way. Maybe you'll make me cry. I mean, that would be awful, wouldn't it, really? I think that's just all agree. No tears. Wait, that's it. Where's the rest of me? You can't leave it there. Yes, I can. But don't worry, we will be returning to my lesson and seeing whether anyone cried a little later on. Okay. Well, the good news for you and for our question of Simon's mum is that most people who think their tone deaf actually aren't. This is Vicki Williamson, a music psychologist from the University of Sheffield, and she looks at how people's musical abilities differ and why. There was a study done of Canadian students a few years ago where they asked people to self-refer if they thought they were tone deaf. And then they conducted the only assessment we have for detecting Congenpley Museo, which is a genuine difficulty in music processing. And they found that less than a quarter of the students actually had a real difficulty. When people were self-referring as tone deaf, what they typically meant to say is that they struggled with singing. They didn't think they were very good at it. They weren't very confident and other people told them they weren't very good. And are people born, Freddie Mercury or Taylor Swift, or how much training is required to get from a base level to being a wonderful singer? There's good evidence that what we might call talent is partly genetic because you need to be blessed. First of all, with a number of physical attributes that are going to stand you in good stead, you need to have good lung volume and ability to control the muscles around your larynx, good vocal cavity, things like that. So you can be genetically blessed in that sense. But the key factor is training, is exposure to inspiration. These things are all key to the people who developed into Taylor Swift and Michael Jackson's. So most people who describe themselves as tone deaf don't have anything clinically amiss. Yeah, that's right. So there is a recognized condition, Vicki mentioned it just then called A Museo. We're going to come onto that in just a moment. But first, Hannah, I think really we should get back to your singing lesson. OK, although I warn you, I am a lot more posh vice than Taylor Swift. Yes, this is procrastination. Can you just play the tape, please? I would like you to sign me one note, Hannah. Can I pick? No, I'm going to try choosing one for you. Got it. OK, so try me this one for a start. Now, all you're going to do is... Ah... like that. Ah... OK, well the good news is that that was in tune. Yes! OK. Now, what happens if we just pretend you're quite, quite excited? OK. I think you are actually aren't you excited to be singing? Of course. So excited face on, like this. So see my excited face. Ah... Ah... Now, this was a 90 minute in depth lesson from the good humid and very patient singing teacher, Michael Bonshaw. So I know you'll be relieved that I am sparing you the entire experience. But suffice to say, there was humming. God. There was owing. Ooooooo... Lovely. But it all started to go a bit wrong when we came to the quite high line. Lalalalalala... You know, I just saw Michelle up for Jesus' face in the middle of that high note. And I couldn't. I couldn't. You could do it. I think it was almost like Winston. Her hearing is very important to her. Why didn't you hear that? Yes, thanks Adam. Ah, Michelle said that it was just her concentrating face, but I remain unconvinced. OK. We just set that aside for a minute. What is life really like if you do have this actual clinical form of tone deafness known as A Musia? Well, I know it's rolled at the barrel. Apart from that, I mean, it's piano music. The fact that it had wrong notes is not something I would have noticed. Meet Martin Price. He's in his 60s, he lives in Wales, and he has A Musia. Just as people who are colourblind, can't see certain shades, people like Martin don't hear music in the same way. For him, it all started when he was 11 years old, sitting in a music lesson. The teacher put on this piece of music. And his teacher went on to close his eyes and conduct along, losing himself in the music and reveling in the emotion. He then proceeded to go on about how wonderful and great it was and take for granted that everybody was going to think how wonderful it was. And I just couldn't actually see what he was on about at all. Maybe classical wasn't Martin's bag. How about pop? I was 18 in 1970, so I would try and get interested in the Beatles or whatever, but I could never actually see what the whole point of it was. And as time went on, Martin began to dislike music more and more. I mean, I classify music as being offensive and innocuous. Inocuous music you can tune out or ignore, and offensive music is too loud or discolent or whatever to do that with. Everyone does have some music they don't connect with. They do, so give me an example. Well, for me, the stone roses, so I've tried very hard to learn to love them, but I do genuinely just find it innocuous or offensive. I actually gasped when you said that. I'm not sure that we can be friends anymore. I am joking, mostly. I feel the same about Coldplay. I'll see, I quite like Coldplay. I gasped again. I think people who don't like Coldplay are music snubs. Yeah, I think people who do like Coldplay don't like music. Well, I guess it is quite rare for somebody to have never had an emotional connection with music at all. Yeah. It is estimated, though, that between two and four percent of people who would have clinical A music like Martin, in some cases, thought to be from birth, sometimes it's acquired, say, after brain injury. So the question is, what causes it? Music psychologist, Vicki Williamson, has been studying people like Martin. At this stage, we do not know precisely why Congenplei Music happens. We have a number of candidates that have come into and out of popular acceptance over the years. One pathway that was suspected as potentially being involved is a big white matter pathway, so processing pathway in the brain that stretches from just behind your ears to the front of your forehead. And it's carrying messages about sound. It's called the Archaeoate Physiculus. And for years, people thought maybe some disruption along this pathway somewhere might explain Congenplei Music, but the research is ongoing and there are other candidates. So going to the question, going to Simon, he refers to his mum being tone deaf. Is there a way that Simon's mum can tell whether she's just not very good at singing or very confident or is actually clinically A music? Well, the only way to really tell is to complete the Montreal battery for the evaluation of A musier, which is a test that looks at whether you can spot irregularities in musical stimuli. Now, if you want to test yourself, he is a snippet of that assessment. Listen to these two musical intonates and decide whether they sound the same or different. And the second one. Were they the same? Obviously not. Correct. Now, what about this pair? Obviously the same. Correct. You passed. Although the real test for A musier is a lot longer. You mean you can't accurately diagnose this condition in 30 seconds? We're not. Now, all that's left for us is to answer the last part of Simon's question. Is there anything he can do to make sure that his son isn't tone deaf? And for that, I turn back to my singing teacher, Michael. I do think there are quite a lot of things we can do to help children to have confidence with their singing and with making music. Even if you're not a person who views yourself as a singer, spend time singing with your children, singing nursery rhyme, singing at bedtime, helping them to get to know their voices. My own opinion is that we all have a voice. I just don't think that everybody's learned how to use it and some of us need a little bit more help with it than others. Ah, like you. Yes, thank you. So, Dr. Rutherford, in answer to the question, is my mum tone deaf? Can we say case solved? Yes, I think we can. Most people who think they are tone deaf actually aren't. But there are a small proportion of people who are actually A music, meaning they don't hear the same differences in melody as the rest of us. So, if you generally enjoy music and like singing along to the radio in the kitchen, then you probably aren't tone deaf. You might just need a little bit more practice. And few people being mean and making negative comments, I don't know, Motherfidd. And maybe some sound proofing in your house? So, that was the curious case. Wait, I've forgotten the name thing again. The tone deaf and melodic mysteries. The melodic mysteries. So, that was the... Oh, damn it. I've forgotten the name. The melodic mystery. I think it would make much more sense if you should sing it. That was the case of the melodic mystery. Mum, mum, mum, mum, mum. I think you also need to use it. But anyway, thank you very much for introducing Michelle Martin. It remains to say, please do send us in your curious cases to curiouscases at bbc.co.uk And check out the BBC Future website for lots of extra stuff that we have. Check out as well. That's what the really cool kids say these days, isn't it? Check it out. Check it out. Look at all the articles and vids that we have. I take consider myself one of those cool kids. Loals.
