Hello, welcome. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hi. Hello. This is the fourth episode in the fifth series of the curious cases of Fry and Rutherford. Indeed. And this episode, actually this is one of my favourites. Not gonna lie, like this one a lot. Did a bit of maths. Did a bit of maths. But also it's just a nice question. Did a bit of maths from a nice warm office whilst I was standing in my right as I was standing in a field at the University of Reading. The thing is you do complain but you also really like it. I do really like it. I do genuinely really like it. I wasn't really dressed for it because we didn't think it was going to slash down quite as hard as it did. I think there's also work going on with Reading for. So we say what you actually did. You let off a party balloon in Reading. Yeah, I did. You went to Reading. Yeah. Can't let one off in London. No, it's probably rules. Probably. Clean air. But it was definitely just a party balloon. Proper experiment though. Is it? Was it? Yes. Should we do it? Okay, go. In today's episode we bring you the curious case of the astronomical balloon. Yes, lovely question. Winged its way to us at curiouscases at BBC.co.uk from Leeds, Care of Juliet Gok age nine. And she asks how far up can a helium balloon go? Could it go out to space? You know what? How are we can we can calculate this? Possibly or seeing a science is about observation and experimentation. We could actually just do it. That sounds like you're volunteering for a field trip again. I'm always up for some field work on woods and upwards. Fine by me. Yet another glamorous assignment for me. I'm standing in a cold dark field at the University of Reading whilst Hannah is no doubts. Lording it up in the studio with cups of tea. I'm here with Dr. Kerry Nichol, who's an atmospheric scientist. And we're going to do the experiment. We're going to do it for real, aren't we? Yep. Yep. So we're about to launch a children's party balloon, which is filled with helium into the sky to try and figure out how high it's going to go and how are we going to track it? Well, the problem with party balloons is that they're very light. They're not very big, which means they don't have much lift. So we can't actually put a GPS tracker on it or anything like that that we can actually transmit data back to us. So we're going to use a, I guess it's a rather old-fashioned method where I've soldered up an LED, which is currently flashing. And we're going to time how long we can see this balloon for. I've estimated how fast I think it's going to go. And by using some simple physics that, hopefully, everybody learns... That's physics, complex physics. ...complex physics. Everybody learning skill as in speed equals distance over time using that little equation. We're going to calculate how high this balloon goes. That's awesome. I mean, it's so high tech as to be almost unbelievable. And there are trees, there's some radio masks next to us, next to a shed in a field in University of Reading. Just to, again, emphasise the glamour of this assignment. But we're hoping that it's not going to land in the tree. No, no. And so, so, hopefully, we've got enough lift here that it's actually going to go up. Okay. Right, now is everybody ready? I am ready. Okay. Dr. Nichol, when you are, we need to count down. Okay, count down, right. Three, two, one, go. Go! The drama of this is almost indescribable. It is going up. It's going up, it's going up. And there's no tree in sight. Well, I think we can add that one to the list of greatest science experiments of all time. Yep, really up there with the time that we smashed up some biscuits with a hammer. Hang on, though. Isn't there an international shortage of helium going on it? Should you really be doing this? Well, there have been problems with helium supply recently, because you can't produce it artificially. You have to extract it from the earth just like with other natural gases. And there was a point recently when we had only an estimated 30 years of reserves globally left. But they use it in MRI scanners and cryogenics as well, right? Not just party balloons. It isn't just for party balloons, although that is an important use for helium. But a huge reserve was discovered in Tanzania last year and some others have been popping up over the last few years. And besides helium in party balloons is pretty low grade stuff. All right, then I'll let you off. But back to Juliet's question, because I think there is another vital thing that we need to consider here, if we're sending a balloon into space. Where does space begin? I asked Marant Kikula from the Royal Observatory in Greenwich. Well, you think it would be a very simple answer, and it all depends on where you define space to begin. There's a thing called the Carmen line, which was invented by scientists called Theodore von Carmen, which is 100 kilometers above sea level. And that's where most people agree that space officially begins. This is the height, at which the atmosphere becomes so thin that if you wanted to fly aerodynamically like an aeroplane using wings and air pressure, you'd actually have to travel faster than the orbital speed, so you'd actually just fly away from the earth. So it's the place where you stop being able to fly like a plane and you have to be able to fly like a spacecraft. So if you were up past the Carmen line then, you'd see the Earth curvature. Would you feel like you were in space? You would definitely feel that you're in a different part of the universe. The Earth's atmosphere, most of it would be below you, so you'd see that beautiful curve of the Earth, but it isn't even above the top of the atmosphere. Things like the aurorae happen above that, and even things like the space shuttle and the International Space Station orbit within the very top, very thin there of the atmosphere. So the Carmen line is the official definition, and that's where you'll go if you sign up as a space tourist, but actually the Earth's atmosphere extends far beyond that, and if you want to go really into the depths of outer space with a really hard vacuum, you have to go out to at least about a thousand kilometers. A thousand kilometers. Even NASA gives the astronaut wings at 80k. And did you get up to 80 kilometers with your balloon? Well, back to our launch in that dark damp field in Reading and the very patience and quite cheery, Kerry Nichol. Unfortunately, though, this space flight is not going strictly according to plan. So we think it's going to go up about two meters a second. And now it's going sideways. Yes, so the thing to realize about balloon assenses that they very rarely go straight up. They often travel a lot further horizontally than vertically. And I think there was even a story in the news a few weeks ago about a children's balloon that traveled 370 miles from Dundee in Scotland to Bambri, which is really impressive. How did he still manage to identify it? Because someone found it in offense with the little boy's name on it and a picture that he'd drawn and put it on Facebook. And somehow the owner of the balloon spotted this or I think his dad spotted this. So potentially with our balloon, with your bespoke LED high-tech equipment attached to it, and it's heading towards what came bridge now, it could make it to Holland. Yeah, it could potentially, yeah. I mean, weather balloons make it all the way across the English Channel all the time into France and Belgium occasionally as well. And Dutch listeners out there to curious cases do let us know if you come across our balloon. So the other thing here is that we've also got a cloud layer. Yeah, it's going into the clouds. If we look behind us. Yep. Can anybody see it? I can't see it anymore. Oh, that's gone. Hail balloon. You served us well. So that's two minutes and 45 seconds, which is about 500 meters. Half a kilometer. Perfect. Yeah, I'm choosing to use the terminology suboptimal here. It wasn't ideal conditions. It was thick clouds. It was very windy and quite rainy. Anyway, I didn't know if you volunteered for this one. Okay, no, you're right. But call me picky. I think I may have spotted just a couple of major issues with your calculations. Go on then. Well, okay, so you're timing how long it takes for the balloon to go outside, right? And you're multiplying this by the speed to get the distance. Yeah, maths. Okay, but if it went horizontally and disappeared into the clouds, yep. Not really measuring how high the balloon goes vertically, are you? Well, there may have been one or two suboptimal factors in our methodology. Seriously, never leave a biologist in charge of equations. May I again refer to who was standing in the field actually doing the experiment and who was at home with their slippers on? Well, seeing as your field trip was an unmitigated suboptimal disaster, I think it's time that sitting in a room with equations came to the rescue because we can work this out. Now, first off, I need to go get what's over there in the corner, which is we sent Michelle out shopping. She bought some little party balloons for you. Ah, and this disaster. I was a cancer of helium. So what we're going to do, I have to be over in the corner here, is Delhi, because radio 4 has a limit on how loud a sound is allowed to be. What are we going to do? We are going to deliberately pop some helium balloons. This is genuinely exciting to me. Okay, now if we can measure the radius at which this pops, I can use the ideal gas equation to calculate the pressure inside the balloon. Then we can look at the pressure difference and use that then to look up how high that relates to in the atmosphere to work out what height this balloon would pop. Nice plan. Thanks. Okay, here we go. Oh, God, I haven't turned it on. Okay, right. She's going to pull it up to you. Okay, okay, I think that's pretty big. The balloon says birthday boy on it. I'm so touched. Okay, we're doing that about 40-30 metres. We're pretty close. Hold on, I've got a ruler, of course. That's pretty close to bursting the jiggery. Okay, that's 30 centimetres. Are we almost there? Oh, that's science for you. Oh, yeah, it's young so much. That was pathetic. Right, so 30 centimetres. That gives us, okay, it would pop at about two to three kilometres. Wait a minute, you just, you can't just, you've got to show you working. You can't just say two to three kilometres. I'm concerned about your margin. It's a very, very, very thin. Yeah, it's quite wide margins of error there, I think. But somewhere between one and ten kilometres, I'd say, it's going to pop. We're approximately 98 kilometres short of the common line. Yes, it's going way away out. But there are other types of balloon, of course, whether balloons, hot air balloons, much bigger, much thicker, could we build a balloon that could get to the edge of space? Here's public astronomer, Marik Kukula again. Well, balloons, hot air balloons were invented in the 18th century and people did get very excited about the missibility to fly above the surface of the earth and early science fiction novels in the 18th and the 19th century. Some of them did use balloons as a way to get from the earth to the moon or further out into space. Unfortunately, that wouldn't work. Just like an ordinary party balloon full of helium, a hot air balloon or a helium-filled weather balloon is going to reach a certain height and then the strain on it is going to become too great and it will pop and fall back down to earth. So for a professional robust weather balloon, you could get it up to about 30 kilometres before it pops. And people do often refer to that kind of height as the edge of space, even though it is still quite below the 100 kilometre carbon line. Could you hit your ride on one of those professional balloons up to 30 kilometres? Well, I think there is a project from Spain to take people up pretty high in balloons, protected from the coal and the lack of oxygen, to give them that view that you would get from that height where you would see the curvature of the earth. Most of the atmosphere would be below you. So you would see that beautiful blue band along the horizon. And when you looked up, the sky would look pretty black and say you should be able to see the stars even during the day. So, Dr. Rye in answer to Juliet Gocks' question, how high could a party balloon travel? Can we say case salt? Yes, balloons will only go about two or three kilometres upwards before bursting due to air pressure. But outwards, they can cross the sea into different countries. And there are plans to build tourist balloons that will take you to the edge of space at around 30 kilometres. But try and fly further to the carbon line at 100km where space officially begins and your balloon will burst not recommended. Some optimal. I tell you what, I can't tell you how excited I was when you blew up that party balloon. Isn't that pathetic? No, it's about your level. Honestly, there's a box which says, what, helium balloon cylinder four parties. You know what, I don't, we've got a whole cylinder of helium now. Oh, you know what? It's surprising, actually, and I'm going to get it. I know this is a slightly stupid thing to say, but this canister is surprisingly light. Now listen, Michelle, Michelle our producer has already warned us that we're not allowed to do this. Can you just go and lock the door? Okay, go lock the door. Quickly, go lock the door. There's the balloons. How do you do this? Okay, you put bend it down. All right, that's one for you. Thank you. Apparently you can actually die by doing this. We won't, so we'll do it sensibly. Okay, we'll do it sensibly and we'll also insist that nobody does this at home. Say that. Welcome to the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. This is the end of the episode four, where we've stopped laughing. It's very serious, but I am, oh, I've never done this before. I've felt it. That's hilarious. I think we are extremely important and serious scientists. He's very, very serious. We're serious scientists and indeed, or if it looked a bit like it. Don't pass out. Oh, good lord. I'm back. And so send us your curious cases to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk and definitely don't in her helium. It's very bad. And now back in the room. Are you trying to blow up yourself now? There's bits of plastic. There's bits of balloon all over the studio. They're shattered. This is the studio they do in our time in. We're going to have to clear it up before Melbourne comes in. And always be the best on your face. This is not going to be good. This is not going to be good. Oh, lord. He went down.
