I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC Gearies! Oh, we've missed you. Yes, we have. We are back. It is... Well, it's not quite. Next week will be series 18, we think. Yes, we're not back back. We're just back to tell you that we're coming back. So make sure that you're back when we're back. Exactly. This is a... Back, we'll be back next week. But as is traditional, when we're about to come back, we are in the recording studio. And here's a little teaser for you. One of the things that we like to do is look at our fan mail that's come in whilst we've been away and spawned to that because you send us such amazing things. Quite right. We're very serious about science communication. We're very serious about our role in improving science capital globally. And when you send us in letters, we take them very seriously as a result. We actually got one letter today, didn't we Adam? We did. Handwritten, which doesn't happen so often. Someone did the care to do that. They absolutely did. So let me just read it this out to you. Dear Mr. Rutherford, stroke Ms. Fry. Okay. So if you can guess whether you think it's good or bad, there's a letter based on how the title does. So strange. I attach a photocopy of a magazine article referring to the alleged light weight presentation of science programs by the BBC. Could this be you? Well, thank you for writing it. Light weight. Light weight. Anyway, onto the most stupid science papers that the world has to offer sent in by you. Starting with pressures produced when penguins poo calculations on avian defecation. So that is the real title of this paper by the scientist Victor Beno-Méa Rocco and Joseph Gal sent in by John Mayer, Fredrickson. Thank you, John. Tell me the title again. Pressures produced when penguins poo. Basically, it's a, it's a very detailed analysis of the volume and speed at which penguins defecate. Let me read. Was there any motivation for the study? You're on curious too. I don't know why you even asked that. So the fundamental question to studying penguins. Let me just quote you. Birds could theoretically increase their projectile defecation range by squirting 45 degrees upwards. That's the conclusion. Well, well, well, wait. They could increase their range if that, what, as if they wanted to. I'm sorry, I should have given you more context. Here's something from the method section. From a few quote, spot on photographs. I don't even know what that means. We estimated the aperture from which the semi-liquid excretory material is released to possess a maximal diameter of 8 millimeters at the moment of, again, in parentheses, firing. How are they? Lovely job. Somebody's done there. Absolutely delight. I just think that when you're like a young aspiring scientist, maybe thinking about going to university or thinking about your PhD and thinking, this is the stuff that is going to change. People's lives and the world for the better. And then 20 years later, you're writing the sentence. The birds theoretically increase their projectile defecation range by squirting 45 degrees upwards. Still, it's at the absolute limit of human knowledge, isn't it? So we're pushing the boundaries of everything that can be known. It made me think when I read this, that there's a couple of other questions about animals that can projectile things that can squirt, octopuses. Sure. You know how much I love octopuses. I know you love octopuses. There's a couple of incidents, including one in the University of Otago, which is what we know we've got curious down in Otago. We've had guests from the University of Otago in New Zealand, where they had octopuses in tanks. Is it octopuses? Yes, or octopi? It's not octopi. It's not octopussy either. Jim's Bond. It's octopuses. They had some intanks. They had some octopuses in tanks in the University of Otago, and they kept discovering that the lights were being short-circuited when they weren't there at night. So the researchers would come in and the fuses had blown. And it happened repeatedly, so they set up some web accounts to actually look at what was going on, because it was super weird to explain. Basically, when they left, the octopuses were squirting water from their tanks at the light switch in order to switch off the lights. No. And if you think that's completely free-case, one-off, exactly the same phenomenon happened in a university in Germany. Oh my goodness. Okay, I have so many questions. I don't know where it's done. Do you watch that Netflix one about the guy in the octopus? I mean, my main conclusion from it was, I mean, the Oxford's especially remarkable, like really, really special, very amazing. My main thing was imagine being married to a guy who decides to do every waking hour in the water with an oxygen. Not with it, not with it at once. Not with it, not with it. And then I think he kept kids as well. He's just like, oh, there's my dad. Oh, off in the ocean again. Yeah. Just going to pop down the seedy octopus. I'll see you in a few hours. In a few hours. Yeah. Slash years. Yeah. I've got a pay-per-you. Yes, please. This one's called The Survival Time of Chocolate's on Hostel Awards. It's a covert observational study. No, you think, King. Wouldn't it be great to quantify the consumption of chocolates in a hostile world environment? And you're absolutely right. It would. And so this team of scientists, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven of them. Wow, it's a multi-author study. Next. No, you guys. I mean, there was a rumor on the ward that this study was going on. People wanted to be part of it. What they did is at four wars at three hospitals within the United Kingdom, is that they covertly placed two 350 grand boxes of quality street and roses. On each ward, eight boxes were used in the study, containing a total of 258 individual chocolates. And the boxes were kept on the continuous covert surveillance with time recorded when each chocolate was eaten. This paper, by the way, was sent in by Rachel Palmer, who said that she was not intellectual enough to be cured of the week. How wrong you are. Mastily overestimated our ability. The bar is very, very low. Very low, indeed. I know you're all thinking, though, what has happened? Wow, into the chocolates. How quickly were they eaten? Don't worry, I've got an answer for you. The median survival time of a chocolate, would you like to guess that one? Oh, it's going to be one of those numbers where I'm way out, whatever I say. I want to say eight minutes. Incorrect. Median, so the middle. Oh, an hour? Pretty close, 51 minutes. Now, I'm sure you don't matter. What are the dynamics of this? If I do a curve of these chocolates over time, what would it look like? And you're absolutely right. Adam, I can see it in your eyes. I can see what you're thinking. It is an exponential decay model. Yes, this is fighting. But I was thinking that because all of the most popular ones would go quickly at the beginning and you'd be left with a terrible nut and toffee ones. Oh, you are absolutely right. There is a series of stages, the grabby phase at first, and then nobody quite wants to take the last chocolate as you tail off to the end. I also know what you're thinking. How does quality street compare to roses? I was thinking that partly because I can never quite tell the difference between them. Well, quality street, hang around for quite a lot longer. Let's put it that way. Interesting. I know what else you're thinking, Adam. Did they go through ethical approval before? I was thinking that. No, they said they did not seek ethical approval. There's no identifiable individual data we're collected. We considered the effects of the availability of additional chocolate resulting in weight gain. But given the free availability of such products, lack of coercion and that an individual's additional chocolate consumption as a result of our study was minimal, we thought it was a minor issue. Science done right and done for it right. I actually absolutely disagree. Seeking ethical approval should be. And I think in fact, is a prerequisite for publication in the BMJ. I think they have violated the ethical standards of one of the pillars of the medical community. And I think all of the results should be expunged from the record. I feel very strongly about this. And that, ladies and gentlemen, dear listeners, dear curious, is why Dr Adam Rutherford, geneticist and broadcaster and bio-slesiation, Professor Hannah Frye are absolutely not lightweight. Thank you very much. See you next week.
