I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC Season 14, Curios, we are back with a super scary double bill with my special Vincent Price voice. You waited for the light correctly that time. Yeah, so it's not. Yeah, to do two takes at that because there's a little queue light that comes on in the studio when we're allowed to talk. And Adam was so excited about saying he's Vincent Price voice that he just talked all over it. Yeah, so if that wasn't very good, it's because the best one wasn't recorded. I blame the BBC for that. Me too. I think this is Melbourne Braggsport. Most things are Melbourne Braggsport. Anyway, we are back. It is series 14. We start with just one of the most joyous, curious cases. I think it ever done. Was it joyous? I loved it. Was it joyous, Adam? Was it? I don't remember this being joyous. In the first two episodes, I got to watch a horror film and go on some roller coasters. You didn't have a great time doing that. No, you know what, right? Okay, I had you stamped. Okay, I made you get your backwax and it's a habit that you've now unable to break and you continually do it. Yep, once a year. Okay, I tried to get someone to make you faint. Sure, all of those things happened. But none of those things I imagine resulted in you staying in a hotel room on your own a few nights after recording curious cases unable to sleep with the light off. Oh, I wish I could say I'm sorry about that. But the listeners are going to find out exactly how unsur-I am. No! Cracky, the doors in this studio could really do with an oil. And I've got my massive boots on today. Sorry, I'm late. Yeah, I'd say scarily late, in fact, I'm, you got the script with you. Yeah, he going. The midnight hour is close at hand and we're back with a new series and an eerie double bill. Hang on. You tried to scream but terror takes the sand before. Did you write this? And not exactly. Well, we have got a Halloween themed episode for you today. This is inspired by the following message received from curious listener Heidi Dockty. Why do people like to be scared? For example, going on a scary amusement park ride or watching scary movies that make you jump. Why do some people like to be scared, I think that should say? Yeah, because I can tell that you are super excited about this episode. Tell me Hannah, do you like scary movies? No, the answer to that adam it is a resounding no, but I have a sense that you're going to make me watch right, not you? Quite possibly because today I am Dr. Terror. And to fit in with our spooky Halloween theme, I thought it best that we follow Heidi's question to the letter and I would love you to experience the same thrill and excitement that I get watching scary movies. Okay, so it took several days of text messages to actually decide what we could watch because you, Hannah Frye, had a lot of vetoes. I don't like horror films, so I said no knives, no gore, no jamesores. All of which is somewhat limiting for the horror genre. Adam, those are the grand rules. Yeah, okay, so after much ado, we finally decided on one acceptable option, which we settled down to watch a few days ago at Hannah's house. Are you ready? I just forgot one thing I need to do. You have been procrastinating. I have been sitting here for an hour now waiting for you to tidy things up and come and I've got to do an email. I see you've made yourself comfortable in my house. I'm super comfortable. You got your feet up on my footstool, my dog, Molly, cuddled at your, she's a bit wiffy. You've got your socks off, I know that's what the issue is. Shall we watch this film? I don't, okay. So we're going to watch The Woman in Black, okay, which stars Daniel Radcliffe. Oh, is it good? rated 15 for psychological horror. 15, okay. Look, it started. Oh, don't hold on before we get all of that. I'd like to point out that while this might have been a 15, it's also notoriously frightening. Yeah, well, it's a classic Gothic ghost story. So we'll come back later to find out if you actually managed to remove the cushion from in front of your face for long enough to actually see any of this film with Harry Potter in it. Right. So while we're going Gothic then, I called up Scary Scholar Mateus Classen author of Why Horror Sejuices and I started by asking him when horror began. If you were to go to a conference for horror scholars and you asked that question, most people would say that horror began with the publication of a book called The Castle of Otranto around Christmas time in 1764 because that one book written by an Englishman named Horus Walpole is usually regarded as the first so-called Gothic novel and the Gothic novel is a precursor of what we today would call horror. The story begins as the Prince of Otranto, Manfred, is preparing for the wedding of his beloved son, Conrad. The company was assembled in the chapel of the castle and everything ready for beginning the divine office when Conrad himself was missing. Manfred quickly dispatches one of his servants to investigate. The servant came running back breathless in a frantic manner, his eyes staring and foaming at the mouth. He said nothing but pointed to the court from whence was heard a confused noise of shrieks horror and surprise. The first thing that struck Manfred's eyes was a group of his servants endeavouring to raise something that appeared to him a mountain of sabre plumes. What are you doing, Cried Manfred Rothley? Where is my son? A volley of voices replied, oh my lord, the Prince, the Prince, the Helmet, the Helmet. But what a sight for a father's eyes. He beheld his child dashed to pieces and almost buried under an enormous helmet. An enormous helmet. This sounds like a quest to Monty Python and the beginning to the thriller video. Yeah, I can't stop laughing about the enormous helmet. The story was the origin of so many of the tropes still seen today in horror films. So you've got a spooky gothic castle, an ancient prophecy supernatural visions. What do we watch that film? Well, the thing is that horror is a product of its time. She's something that I discuss with Margie Kerr. So she's a sociologist who studies fear and she told me the history of horror is really the history of societal angst. Our scary stories really are a mirror of society. So you look back through time and you look at the stories, the scary stories that people are telling. And you can see, you know, what are the big challenges? What is this culture really frightened of right now? So for example, looking at some of the monster movies during the mid 20th century and that was happening while we were thinking about going out into space and landing on the moon and there was a greater awareness of, hey, there's a whole universe out here. What could be there? Right. And if we're talking about Monster movies, then I suppose Godzilla is another good example made in Japan. Yeah, absolutely. That was a time right after we dropped an atom bomb and we didn't know what would happen, how it would change our environment, how it would change, you know, the animals in our environment. So the idea that there could potentially be a mutated lizard, a monster kind of the hemath that was a real kind of threat. And so we see that reflected and exaggerated and made into a monster that we can then defeat on screen. Again, I think I probably could have handled a 50s B movie like Godzilla. Yeah, well, Godzilla's not really scary at all. Anyway, like we said, what is scary changes over time. So Bram Stoker's Dracula could be red as an allegory for sexually transmitted disease in the Victorian era, the zombie classic, dawn of the dead. That was a commentary on unbridled consumerism and the woman in black. The woman in black has a very clear political message about not spending the night with a black toothed, murdery ghost lady and a super creepy decrepit mansion containing Victorian wind up monkey dolls. What's that? There's some really horrible monkeys. Creepy monkey dolls. I'm sure the dolls are watching. Yeah, everyone's watching. It's in blood. There's blood. Oh, no. Like very seriously. I don't understand how you find this part. I love it. It's so exciting. My heart's racing. There is something wrong with you. I don't think there is. This is genuinely one of the joys of my life. Honestly, I just don't understand it. So as a result, this is what I ask, Danish Horuskoller, Matthias Klassen, why would anyone enjoy watching something that makes them feel terrified? It's the big question. I think it's the one field defining question as the paradox of Horuskoller. Why do people voluntarily seek out the kind of entertainment that's explicitly designed to evoke negative emotions in them? So I've been trying to build what I call a biocultural theory of Horuskoller. I think that we're playing with negative emotion. And much of human play has to do with eliciting negative emotions in a safe context. So chase play or hide and seek are ways in which kids can experience mild, tolerable doses of anxiety, suspense, even fear. And it's pleasurable to them because they realize it's all for fun. There is no real risk. And a similar thing happens, I think, on a cognitive level, when most of us enjoy watching a horror film, realizing that the strong physiological and emotional responses do not, in fact, indicate that there is danger. So we can kind of enjoy and wallow in increased heart rates, sweaty palms, goose bumps, and all the rest. Well, that's exactly why I love the feeling of impending terror and the physical sensations that go with it. But that's exactly the bit that I don't like. All right, well, if we're talking for physiological responses to horror, probably the most famous one is the jump scare. A bit like when you did this when we were watching the woman in black. What? Apologies to any cats that we may have scared out there. I think several minutes came off my life expectancy at that moment. So I consulted psychologist and broadcaster Claudia Hammond about what makes us jump out of our skins. Well, strictly speaking, this is the startle reflex. And in a way, it's surprise rather than fear, but fear can often be involved. And even babies will do a startle reflex. If they're suddenly surprised by a loud noise, you see that same jumper surprise that we do when we're watching a film. Is the startle reflex heightened when you are generally fearful anyway? Yes. So if a film makes you nervous for a while first and they're building up suspense and you know something's going to happen, something's going to happen, something's going to happen. And then like in jagged edge, the arm comes through the window, that's the moment that you then jump and you jump even more because you've been already primed to do that. We've all got this sort of trigger ready to be surprised if something happens. But some people jump much more than others all the time anyway. You know, some people are hyper startlers and they jump at everything. I mean, I jumped in my husband just walks in the room. No reason at all. I didn't know he was there and say, what are you doing? Don't do that. And people have done experiments where they've tried to train a hyper startle as to start less. They let off guns beside them. I mean, you know, that's not relaxing really, you think. But they count down from 10 to 0 and they even know the moment the gun is going to go off and they still jump out of their skins. Well, that explains a lot then. I'm just a hyper startler. Yes. And in our next episode of Curious Cases, we'll be taking hammer to a firing range and deliberately trying to startle her. No, we won't. But okay. So that's why we jump fine. But the question still remains, why do some people enjoy this type of scary thrill while it leaves others cold? So this was my final question from a taste class. Then, do we know why some I would call them weird individuals like Adam really love watching horror films and then other people sensible people like me don't? I think that's still one of the big remaining questions in horror research. We wanted to see if there are any aspects of personality that can help us answer that question. And so we did a big study where we recruited close to 1200 North Americans and asked them a whole bunch of questions about their relationship with horror. And we also obtained a personality profile of each of them. And what we found was that people who score high on a personality dimension called intellect imagination, also known as openness to experience, are more likely to be horror fans, which suggests that people who enjoy horror films are people who in general enjoy intellectual stimulation who are artistically aesthetically curious. Hold on a second, intellectual imagination. Are you saying that Adam's got more intellectual imagination than I do? We'd have to do a personality profile on each of you because there can be other variables. So what is it about people who don't like horror films? What does that say about those individuals? People who respond very strongly to negative stimuli. You know, the people for whom it's the end of the world if they forget their credit card when they're shopping, they will not be horror fans because they will be overwhelmed by negative emotion. And also conversely, people who are completely fearless will not be horror fans because they will be bored. But statistically speaking, they're likely to be actually better educated. We found to our surprise a negative correlation between horror liking and education. Intellectual imagination aesthetically curious. I am liking this guy. Yeah, I'm better educated this than let's call it one all. So Dr. Fry, when it comes to why we like horror, can we say case-old? Not really. I think you also did a bit unhinged, frankly. Horror charts, the evolution of societal fears. I mean, why would you do this? Jump scares tap into our body's natural startle response, which I'm fine to ignore. Some people are hyper startlers, which makes them more easily shocked. And that is the end. Of part one, because next week horror looks you right between the eyes on the roller coaster of doom. I don't even know why we're friends. Yeah, listen, I have to apologise for constantly trying to do my terrible Vincent Price voice. I just the number of times, curios, that both Hannah and Michelle had to press the button and go, can you just ham it down? 50% less ham. 50% less ham. I've been waiting years to ghost, boogie on the radio. Have you though, or do you do it every year? It's definitely one of those two. Definitely one of those two options. So we had a number of problems recording this issue, which I think we need to go through as an agenda. Okay, number one, Hannah's difficulty in saying the word horror scholar. It's actually quite hard. The number of times she said, holoscora? Horror slow or scholar roller. Probably shouldn't have drunk this morning. Now, the main problem that we had as we alluded to in the programme itself was actually finding a film that Hannah was willing to watch. And in fact, actually, I think Michelle has been quite kind in the way that she's edited it, because I was at least four times more wimpy than it was added on that. Okay, so for stars, I was procrastinating for well over an hour. Oh my god, yes you were. I mean, me and Molly had a great time just sitting there. I took my shoes off, had a drink. You make a lot of sweets. I didn't eat a lot of sweets. It was like a cinema experience, just you were not there. You're insisting on having the lights off. Yes. It wasn't fun. It wasn't fun. I had a great time. But it's okay, because I was stuff for my art, Adam. Well, we need to go back a day or two, because in selecting the film, we had a, oh my lord, we had a number of difficulties. So this is our WhatsApp conversation. This is where Adam first heard from Michelle that he was allowed to watch horror film with us. His response was, in capital letters, can I choose? Very excited. Ex-Mashmug. I was like, okay, fine, no knives, though. Really don't do well with knives. That was my first veto. We knew that, but it's well because because of the blood of the soldiers. Exactly. So Adam's first suggestion, knowing that I can't stand knives, we could go to the cinema and watch it too. I think just because I haven't seen it yet. And I really want to see it. My response, are there knives in it too? Adam, sensitive as ever, we shall find out who of life. His next response was us. It's a new film by Jordan Peale, director of Get Out, just amazing social commentary and proper scares on contemporary Americans in a while. Send over a link of the IMDB page. First image on that page, Adam. My question, are there knives? This looks a lot like a knife. It's an image of someone with a mask holding a knife. It's a sword. It's not a knife. It's a sword. I think I'm pre-sure sword still count. You said no knives. On the broad category of knives. I was only working on the information that was presented to me. Anyway, so us was out. Us was out. At this point, Michelle steps in, just want to pay for therapy. Fine budgets being what they are. So we put it out on Twitter, so I selected four films and allowed the people, the curios to maybe choose the film. What were the four films were? The ring? Yes. The Babadook. The witch. The witch. It turns out it's about someone blooming stealing a baby. I do not love that film. I do not love that film. This is my first episode back, after maternity leave. Probably not wise, Renew. That was a little insensitive of me. I do admit. I think the shining was one of them as well. I vetoed the shining because it's just too classic. And I think people and it also has scary bloody children with knives. Sorry about that. There was few scary bloody children in this film as well. Their work. Then Twitter voted for the ring. The Japanese version of the ring. Which I have to confess is actually the only horror film I have ever seen. And was a genuinely horrific experience. Because I watched it when I was a student, second year of university, a big house with loads of boys who did not take kindly or sympathetically. Much like you, Adam. I do not. To my dislike of the genre generally. So during the film, I had to pause at one point because I was like, I really can't take this. So I went upstairs to get to the toilet upstairs, just to have a breather. While I was upstairs, these lads got a kitchen chair, stood on the kitchen chair, which was immediately below this bathroom upstairs. Got a broom and scraped for sealing. Oh, my dream I was in. So that I was in the bathroom in the dark at night time, wondering what the hell was going on. And then for approximately two months afterwards, they would just repeat it. He come up to behind me as I was doing the washing up and just whisper in my ear, start alcohol. Which of you have seen the film? You'll know. I mean, it's just not just in the world. See, we've got a real tradition in my house at home for doing this. On the weekend, I hid in my daughter, my 13 year old daughter's cupboard for 15 minutes. And it lasted so long that I actually eventually fell out of the cupboard because I was balanced on my, and you know, she's 13 and she's pretty cool and she'd turn around and just went, Oh, dad, get out. Do you like being jumped at, though? Or do you like, do you like being the jumpy or do you like being the jumper? Yeah, I do like it actually because another thing that they do is they're all still small enough for my children to hide in the laundry basket. And that has become an ongoing theme. But to the extent that I know that they're in there because one of them's gone missing, like is Jake in the laundry basket? Yes, he is. Okay, I'm going to have to play this one out. You know what? I did think it was interesting, though, how you were talking about horror films having a place in time, being scary in a moment in time and not really reflecting what they're superficially about. Yeah, so this was the point that Margie Kerr was making. And I think it's completely true that films like Godzilla, which are actually about fears of nuclear war in the 1950s. And we don't have those fears so much anymore. So we look to other things. There were loads of other examples that I bored Michelle with when we were writing the script. Jaws, you know, proper scary movie is at many scholars have argued that it's an allegory for either watergate. What? Yes, why? Can't remember. Or it's a Marxist allegory because you've got the consumerism of the mayor versus the relentless, I'm not very good at these allegories. You know what, though, Matthias Cluster, when I talked to him about Jaws as well, and he told me about the Freudian explanation for why we're scared of Jaws. Does it involve male genitalia? Female genitalia. It's the, let me see if I get this right. We're scared because when you look at Jaws and especially Jaws' mouth, it reminds you of female genitalia. I'm sort of ignoring that. Do you want to noise me about that theory beyond the fact that it is absolute nonsense? Is that it really assumes that the audience is a heterosexual male? Yes, it does. Right. Why are women scared of the JJs for teeth? Well, it's still pretty terrifying whatever sex you are. The shining. So the shining was a film that I thought hard about whether that should be the one that we watch and decided against it because it's such a high quality film and it's so well known that I think maybe a lot of the scares are just so culturally embedded that we wouldn't notice them. Yeah, I mean, everyone's seen that image of the two twins, right? Exactly, exactly. But there is a lot of semi-academic and academic analysis of what the shining is actually about. And there's an entire film called Room 237, which is the scary room in the film, which goes through the theories with increasing incredulity. And it's very funny because some of the suggestions are that it's actually a film about the mistreatment of Native Americans and there is a whole Native American theme to the haunting within the shining. So that's kind of plausible. There are many, many conspiracy theories associated with Stanley Kubrick. And one of them is this that some conspiracy theorists believe that Stanley Kubrick filmed the moon landings secretly. He was the director of the moon landings. And the shining is an apology by him for that. And the evidence for this is Danny has an Apollo 11 jumper on throughout that film. Blown it wide open. I know. It's difficult to argue with that. Crikey. I mean, everything I've heard up until now overturned. Yeah, that fact. And you wonder why we didn't go into film criticism rather than sticking with boring old science. Have to say, though, overall, not turned on to horror. I think I'm probably going to leave that one for people like you. I'm sorry about that because I just love them so much as you can probably tell. And you really didn't enjoy that at all. No. Anyway, look, that's the end of horror films. Next week's episode is equally scary, but the truth is that I didn't enjoy it as much as I enjoyed this one. And I enjoyed it more than I enjoyed this. So we may or may not have got to go to a theme park. Put it that way. We may. Put it that way. You know what time it is now, though? What time is it? Well, I have to say, Kirio, you have used the long break wisely. Because, you know, if it was quite easy to get a Kirio badge before, it's not now. The stakes are really. I tell you, that's a good one's coming up. Yes, including this one, which really fits in with our spooky theme today and 80s thriller references. So this was sent in after our amazing, effectively live episode on musical instruments. And we did say that we would love to hear versions of our theme tune. And we received this pretty incredible version of our theme tune from Max Mason, who is 26 and he's from Liverpool. He writes, dear, brother, for the fry, I thoroughly enjoyed last week's episode. Thanks, Max. Indeed. Been a few weeks since he's in this. But as a musician, I could not accept your challenge. I've reworked your marvelous theme tune in the spooky 1980s synth pop fashion. I hope you enjoy it. I had the best time making it. Your devoted Kirio Max. Here we go. A astonishing. That was, that was a thing of great beauty. What was, is an appropriate 80s style approval. It was wickedly walkered. Sorry, didn't he, young? We even born in the 80s. Just. That was a stark Max. You just, you're Kirio of the week. Obviously, you're Kirio of the week. That was super fly. Hey, Michelle, have we still got those two, the two tier badges, like gold ones and purple ones? Tell people about the two tier badges. Oh, we might have just told people about the two tier badges. Why not? That means that some people got purple badge and they didn't know about the gold badges. Well, in which shuffling, shuffling of paper? There's not very much gold badges. How many, how many are they left? I do not have to check the stash. Oh my goodness. Is it limited edition gold badges? Really is. We're going to start seeing them in eBay. Max is like, like, here should be a fluorescently coated. You can't be generous every time, though, Adam. Yes, I can. How many gold badges do we got? I think initially, there were like maybe 20. So there's three of us, two of us in the studio, Michelle in the booth. I think we take a vote. I say Max gets a gold. I only got a purple one, though. You didn't do anything. I did. You photoshopped a picture of me. I paid for that picture. You can't buy a gold curio over the week when your name's in the title of the program. Fine, give it to Max, I don't care. Max, you need to know she threw down her bio in contempt. Then, whereas I've been arguing for you. Michelle votes for Max as well. Max can have a gold badge. No, that was just astonishing, though. Wasn't it? It was so astonishing that I did some proper eighties dance. There was some big fish, little fish, big box, small box. That's more 90s, isn't it? Is it? I think so. There was some low-level break dancing. Seated running low-level break dancing. That is an extremely generous description for what just happened. I did the way of you hand thing. Doesn't that count? I thought you just hit your elbow. So mean. I thought that was astonishing, especially, like, the man, he managed to combine Halloween with a bit of Juran Juran. It was literally perfect. It was literally perfect. Well done, Max. You and the unreluctant giver of a gold curio badge for you. Well done. So if you would like a curio badge for yourself, then you can send us in all manner of things. If they're good, they get a purple one. If they're really good, they get a gold one. You can also send us in questions, things that you've been curious about. Everything should go to CuriousCases at BBC.co.uk. That's the episode. Part two of our scary double bill coming up next week. Hi, I'm Alistair Souk and I want to tell you about the way I see it, a brand new podcast from BBC Radio 3. It's a 30-part series in which we're throwing open the collection at MoMA, the Museum of Modern Art in New York, to some of the sharpest creative minds of our time. We'll be speaking to comedian Steve Martin, writer Roxanne Gay, musician Steve Reich and many, many more. I'll be your guide throughout the series, so join me as I explore one of the greatest collections of modern art in the world. If you'd like to hear more, just search for the way I see it on BBC Sounds.
