I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC Jingley, Jingley, Jingley, Jingley... Was that you doing a Christmas jingle? Yeah, that was my Christmas jingle bells. I feel... I've never felt more festive. Yeah, it's festive edition today. The first of two Christmas-y themed, curious cases. All about in overindulging ones. Overindulging. But that's what you're supposed to do. You're supposed to overindulge a little bit. I mean, I'm going to eat as much as I can. I'm literally going to stuff my face. Anyway, this is all these... These next two episodes are all about the joy and sorrow of overdrinking and first, though over eating in the festive season. Yum. MUSIC Hannah, we're recording already? Sorry, I'm actually conducting my own experiment into today's question. This was sent into curious cases at BBC.co.uk by Alan Forekker from Tower Rung and New Zealand. I can still hear it fizzing. Give me that. I'm confiscating it. Anyway, Alan asks, why does bad food taste so good? And by bad food, he explains, I mean, the things we are told to hold back on, like sausage, chips, and chocolate, and presumably sugary soft drinks, Hannah. Hang on a second, that's four of my five a day, but you're describing that. Well, if you're doing your own experiment, then I'm going to conduct one, two. I took a trip down to the BBC canteen to have breakfast with material scientists and food connoisseur Mark Mead-Ovnik. Have you ever been to the BBC canteen? I haven't. I'm absolutely delighted to be here. Look at this. It is. Oh, my goodness. How many more eggs do you need? There are a lot of eggs over there. It is an awesome spectacle. There's a pile of bacon. It's self-service, so grab a plate. Right, fantastic. Thank you. One bacon russia or two, that's the question. It's two, is the answer. Two, does it happen? I'm definitely having the hash browns because hash browns are food of the gods. I've got my hash browns, I've got some scrambled eggs, now I have just a door baked beans. And I'm going to have absolutely stacks of beans. All right, ready to go. Okay, just coming down to pay. There you go. Thank you very much. Sitting down in a company booth, surrounded by stacks of sausages, bacon and beans, the urge to devour this fatty, carb-y feast is just overwhelming. But why is that? There is a lot of food on your plate, which might not be regarded as the paragon of health. Why is it that our bodies crave such absolute deliciousness? I'm not certainly craved this, I'm really looking forward to eating it. You just interrupt me, mid-forkful, the bacon is calling. Why is that? Well, obviously my taste buds are really looking forward to digging into that. And that's because I've got salt taste buds, I've got sweet taste buds, I've got sour and bitter. And they're all calling out, crying out, to be ignited by this food. And they will be, they'll be a symphony of taste. So we're talking about, you're talking about taste buds, which primarily are on the, while they're on the tongue, in the mouth. I mean, that isn't the whole story, is it? If we say taste is on the tongue, flavour is a much bigger sensation, and it's what drives our cravings, and that's mostly in the nose. So we smell things through our nose, obviously, and that is the smell of cooking. That gets our digestive systems going. You're stomach grumbles, you go, I can't wait for this. But then when you put food in your mouth, you smell it in a different way, retro-nasally, so it goes up the back through into your nose, and a lot of your flavour that you taste, almost all of the flavour you taste, is from that retro-nasal smell. And that's far more sophisticated. That's thousands of flavours. I'm like, just talking about it now makes me feel hungry. The further wood which you're describing it, is only matched by the eagerness that I can see you want to eat it. And I have to say, you know, the smell inside your mouth is in proportion to how volatile lots of those flavour molecules are, and that's why it needs to be hot, a cold English breakfast, and it is getting cold, I'm slightly worrying about it. But the colder it gets, the less flavour it will get, because it'll be less heat for these molecules to become smells inside my mouth. So we've got a real problem here. We've got a professional problem that we're both facing. We are required to make a radio programme here, but both of us are really hungry. The bacon is calling, and I'm afraid I'm going to have to answer that call. So just give you a minute. Yeah. He's right, you know, that bacon was calling me too, and I wasn't even there. Well, yes, and it just shows how well-trained we are to respond to this kind of food, even just hearing about something delicious without seeing it or smelling it can make our stomach start to rumble. Is a fried breakfast your true guilty pleasure, Adam? No, not really. I think my guiltiest pleasure is actually crisps. I do like crisps a lot. I think I know what your guilty pleasure is. Do you? Yes, repeated observations of your behaviour over several years now suggest a strong correlation with this can of fizzy pop that I have confiscated. You know, it's a very fair point. I can validate your conclusion. But you know what, unlike a fried breakfast, these drinks, these sugary drinks, they're not hot, so they don't release the same kind of volatile flavour my IQ was like bacon does that make it so delicious. So why are fizzy drinks and sweet foods in general so appealing? Well, I sought advice from one of the best known food scientists in the world, Professor Linda Bartoszuk from the University of Florida. Now, I'm a bit of a sucker, I've got to be honest for you, for sugary drinks. I try and limit my fizzy pop intake to one ten a day, but often go over. What is it about things like fizzy drink and chocolate and sugar that we crave? Well, first of all, the fuel for the brain is glucose, and that's sweet. So through evolution, our brains have evolved to make us love it because we need it. By loving it, it means that we go out in the world, we try to find it, and when we find it, we take it in and we enjoy it. And that is built in, it's there at birth. In fact, it's even present in a fetus before birth. How can you tell a fetus enjoys sweet food? Well, this goes back to a study that was done in, I think the 1920s by a pediatrician, actually. He injected saccharin into amniotic fluid and the fetus drank the fluid. You can tell if a fetus is drinking by muscle movements in utero. And so we knew very early on that the sweet receptors were mature and that they were producing what appeared in the fetus to be liking. Is that safe? Yeah, it probably was safe, but this was actually done in the 1920s and believe me, safety about experimenting was quite different than we would be a lot tougher now. I don't think you could do that experiment now. Yeah, so let's file that in the ethically questionable historical experiments folder. I think that file might be bursting at the themes already. OK, Adam, as our residentologist, what do we know about how taste works? Well, as Mark Meaddon explained earlier, taste buds are groups of cells situated on the tongue. And we have different types of taste buds. Exactly. The buds themselves are the bumpy bits called papillae, and they're made up of different kinds of specialised cells that recognise different flavours, which are sweet, bitter, sour, salt and umami. Some of these are there primarily to pick up on potential dangers, like bitter taste from toxic plants, and other sense nutrients that we need to survive, like glucose and sugar and sodium in salt. OK, but as Linda told me, our sense of taste goes much further. We tend to think taste receptors are only in the mouth, but they're not. It was a big surprise. There were hints early on, but big surprise. When we found out there were taste receptors all through your stomach, your GI tract, but they have different functions in different places. For example, protein is a big molecule, too big to be tasted or smelled, because our taste and smell systems pick up small molecules. Both the fat and the protein can't really be detected in the mouth, but you swallow them. They're broken up by digestion into fatty acids and to glutamate. Now you get receptors in your stomach that tell your brain this wonderful protein in fat came in. So it makes you like what was in your mouth when you ate the food. How quickly does all this happen then? If you are jumping on a burger, is your stomach tasting it before you finished or is it a while afterwards? Yes, it's certainly tasting it while you're eating the burger. But the truth is that this is all takes place over periods of time. Now, I don't know the first time you ever bit into that burger as a kid, if you liked it or not, but it's doing it over and over that lets your brain learn. And the brain realizes that when these signals from the gut come in and are, we're preceded by this wonderful flavor of the burger, the brain puts it all together and then from there on, all you have to do is sniff the burger and take one bite and you love it. But when you're experiencing food, then you're really experiencing it with your whole body. Oh, it's not conscious. The conscious experience by stimulating our taste receptors is in your mouth. But your stomach doesn't give you a conscious experience. Now, there's one way we might be able to argue that. Maybe when you've got something in your gut that is stimulating your brain, that this is good stuff, it may make you feel better. That is, it may affect your mood. That's an interesting thought. Right, so taste receptors go all the way down to our stomachs, the sense fats and proteins. And our brains are trained to crave them by giving us pleasure when we eat them. Correct. Okay, but how about things like broccoli? I mean, that's packed full of vitamins, stuff that is definitely good for us. And yet, often not quite as appealing as a juicy burger. Yeah, weirdly so. Well, one theory we've actually discussed us in earlier curious cases is that broccoli is slightly bitter, so it might take us longer to learn to like it because we associate bitter foods with danger. All right then, so our bodies train us to like sugar and fat when we young, but then we get older, faster, more bitter. Are we still talking about food here? Now, the problem is that everything in moderation is what we need biologically, but humans are very complex beasts. And we're prone to influences not just by evolutionary biological forces, but also psychological factors. Like being terrified of overcooked broccoli when you were young. Yeah, because broccoli is absolutely delicious, but at school in the 70s and 80s, school cooks boiled all the flavor and joy out of it. Plus, on top of that, what we eat is profoundly influenced by fashions as well. In terms of what we eat, yeah, as evidenced by a million and one fad diet books, mostly with absolutely not a shred of scientific evidence behind them. Quite, so if we go back to today's question, why does bad food taste so good? A lot of psychologists and food scientists think that just by labelling certain foods as bad, we're actually making the problem worse. For example, this is food and science writer Anthony Warner, whose pen name is The Angry Chef. I find it extremely problematic to classify foods as good and bad, because obviously in any food, it depends upon the context in which you eat. When you classify something as bad, you're kind of creating a guilt around it, and you imagine it must be uniquely pleasurable. And that, I think, can make things harder to resist. Guilt is a great way of perhaps a moderating short-term behaviour, but in terms of over the long term, it's an absolutely terrible way of making people change the way they eat, because it kind of puts these things on a pedestal and makes them feel like the forbidden fruit that you must have. Right, so we do talk about guilty pleasures, and we talk about comfort foods, to justifying eating things that are associated with being bad food in inverted commas. How universal is it in different cultures? I think within the US and the UK, we generally have this guilt framework around it. There's a very famous experiment where people are showing pictures of a particularly delicious-looking chocolate cake across different cultures. In France, the first thing that comes to people's minds is celebration. That's a wonderful thing, but in a country like the US, which has a different attitude to food. The first thing that comes to people with minds will be guilt. And actually, this relationship doesn't stop Americans meeting chocolate cake, this feeling of guilt they have around it. And actually, if you study the different attitudes people have to it, the people who have the guilt response tend to have less control about their eating. They tend to have more problems motorbite themselves to change their behaviour in the long term. So you're saying that it's part of the psychology is that by labelling foods as bad, actually has the effect of making us want them more. Yes, definitely. It's like this idea of forbidden fruit. You know, you sort of forbid someone from doing something if it's something they're sort of particularly motivated by, and they will think about it more. And so I think the answer might be within the question, you know, why do bad foods taste more delicious? Well, perhaps it's because when you classify something as bad, you're creating a guilt around it, and you imagine it must be uniquely pleasurable. And that, I think, can make things harder to resist. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to why bad food tastes so good, can we say caseloft? Well, Dr. Fry, we have taste receptors all through our guts, from our tongue to our stomach, which pick up on salt and sugar, fat and protein. We are born liking sweet foods because they deliver refined brain fuel in the form of glucose. And we learn to love things like fat and protein because they provide essential nutrients. However, labelling foods as good and bad may have the opposite effect, making us crave bad food even more. So, eat in moderation and enjoy it. We need fat, sugar and salty foods just not too much. Can I have my fizzy pop back? OK, but just one more. Right, so that is our dietary advice. Eat in moderation, try and be sensible. And it is perplexing why, if you look at the top 100 books, about 40% of them are diet books, and about 40% of them are cookbooks. Have you ever bought a diet book? One? Did you? Yeah, it's really good. What was it? It's the one by Zan Van Tulliken. That actually is one that does genuinely have science in it. And it also says it actually does exactly what we've been talking about. It has really nice recipes. They're not fatty, they're not fashionable. And they just say, here's a nice meal, just eat less of it. That's basically it. That's my diet book. Eat less, do more exercise. Do you want actually this time around being prego? I've eaten so much sugar, I cannot tell you. I'm taking that lemonade away from you. I know it's really delicious. I know we were sort of semi-joking about the amount of fizzy pop that Hannah drinks. But when we come to do these programs, when we sit down and in the morning, I sometimes buy her a can of fizzy pop or a bottle. She often brings another one with her anyway. And then about half an hour later, we'll magic one out of her bag. Before, like, I'm often by lunchtime, she said three cans. There's not a drink. But I just think, just makes me feel good. There it is. There it is. Talking of sweet stuff, though, I did about your family, but in my family, there is a dessert-based phenomenon that happens absolutely guaranteed all the time. And I suspect this is quite a widespread thing. And while I had Linda Boschuk on the line, I thought that it would be worth checking whether this is backed up by scientific evidence. There's a phenomenon very well known to me and my family that you have no matter how fully you are, no matter how much dinner you've eaten, you always have room for dessert, a separate pudding stomach, as we call it, in our house. Is that scientifically sounds? Yes, it certainly is. It's a great idea. The fact is we say, we say, we say, she ate on foods one group at a time. It's called sensory specific satiety. And the scientist who really has worked on that is Barbara Rawls, beautiful, beautiful work. Because sweet as hardwired in the brain, we really, really love sweet. So even after you've eaten everything, you can still have room for sweet, especially since we don't tend to use up sweet, unmain dishes. My husband is going to be delighted with that answer. Scientific proof that you can always have pudding. So cows have, what, four stomachs, we did that in an earlier program. And now we've established that the fri family. How's two stomachs? Well, you know, a little pouch to the side from pudding. Surely. You know what though? I have since learned that this is exploited by people who make, for example, those sort of really chunky types of ice cream with loads of stuff in it. So they know that you sort of fill up all of your different tastes, sensations separately. So you have a bit of, you know, a slightly bitter, a bit of dark chocolate in there perhaps. Something that's a little bit salty, then you also have your fats, your protein, and it's all sort of layered up. So you don't get bored eating one bit. You've kind of eaten more and more and more. It's not a problem for me, because I just don't eat sweet things at all. I don't have pudding ever. I'll eat a lot of crackers and cheese afterwards. This series has been really food-based. We did the whole scones thing, which we promised never to mention again. And that's the end of that reference. We're doing- Just through the next and the next excuse to eat. We do. We do a lot of food in this episode. And then in the next episode, we're gonna, that's all about alcohol. One thing you didn't hear in that interview with Mark Mead Ovener, who's been on the program a number of times. And in fact, was the judge when we made cakes. Another food-based, curious cases. Thank you, Curios, for sending in food-based, Curio questions. Wait, what you didn't hear in that interview was, when we sat down at breakfast in the BBC canteen, literally the moment we sat down, fire alarm went out. They had to evacuate the whole flipping building. Poor old Michelle was having a right-old paddy about it. Quite rightly so. And we had to hide in a celebrity dressing room and lock the door to stop the security guards from booting us out. Did you also get told off by a celebrity's bodyguard? Yes. He came in and looked really sure to do it with us. Now, to speaking of Mark, there was a part of the interview that we didn't use. But he also talked about the satisfaction of eating. That it's the taste and the smell and the whole experience. And he also, he went on to introduce this old Victorian practice, which I think we should definitely bring back into society. A lot of the satisfaction of food is digestion. The whole thing about chewing and the smell and the taste by the way, they are chewing up your digestive system. Your digestive system goes, hey up! Something's coming down here. So you're chewing up your whole system to digest. The Victorian's knew all about it. They didn't focus on the kind of pleasures of instant eating. They focused on sitting in a chair by the fire after you've had your full English breakfast and digesting the food. And it is a very, very enjoyable process. It's kind of tasting it in your stomach, right? And it's a kind of much less immediate response to do with your body going, mmm, delicious. And it's more of a kind of satisfaction that flows through your body. So, carb crash. That's what it's called. Yeah, I know. But can you imagine that? Just retiring to a really comfy Victorian sofa, having a bit of a kit. I mean, that's just Christmas days. It's one of absolute lies. In front of the fire. Yeah. Yeah, really appreciate. Yeah. I want to do that. Yeah, I think we should definitely do that. Now, one of the things that you talked about when we were preparing the script for this, was when we were thinking about the how foods that you put off. Yeah. So I definitely ate a lot of very overcooked broccoli in my youth. And now I can't stand stuff. But for me, the one that I just absolutely will not go anywhere near is kidney and liver. And there's a very real reason for this. Of all. More notes, very specifically kidney and liver. And the reason for this, anyway, the reason, sorry if anyone's eating, or enjoys liver in any way. It was a science lesson when I was about 16 years old. And we were testing out enzymes. And so what we were going to do, we were going to use the enzymes in our saliva to try and, well, I guess decompose some meat. Is that the right word? Yeah, amylase. It's, it's, it's, it's, it's. Amylase, thank you. You thought I was paying attention to the lesson. Anyway, so what they've done is they got us and bits of kidney and liver for us to use as part of the experiment. Unfortunately, it was a really hot summer. And this kidney and liver had been left out for about two days. It was already well past that moment of being on the turn. And then the teacher chopped it up, gave us little bits and test tubes. And then he just had an entire class just gobbling in. Oh, that's so cool. And the smell, I can't tell you. I still, it's so serious in my mind. I can't touch the stuff. That's amazing. So I think my equivalent of that is a bit, I was a bit old, and I was a second year under graduate at a single research project during the summer at UCL. And I was looking after these flies that have their eyes on the ends of stalks. They called stalk-eyed flies. I may have mentioned them on the program before. But they're from Indonesia and they lay their eggs in rotting vegetable matter, vegetation. And we were working on their eggs as a developmental biologist. So my job as the most junior member of this team was to go to the supermarket and buy frozen sweet corn. And then I'd liquidize it and then put it in these little plastic trays and then incubate the trays for a week at 37 degrees until they were seriously rotting. And then I'd take the trays out and they would just be funky. And then pop them in the cages where we keep the flies for 24 hours and the flies would then lay their eggs inside this sweet corn mash that's rotting. I have to retrieve them. And then I had to go through this mess and fish out their eggs in order that we could do experiments on them. Have you eaten sweet corn sin? Nope. The kids, my kids, absolutely love sweet corn. We have it a lot. It's a vegetable and they don't eat vegetables that much. I'm just like, eeey, oooh, don't get over here. Do you know this can happen with sweet stuff as well? I did a statistics project where I was testing to see if people blindfolded could tell the difference between different colored fruit pastels. And I was surrounded by hundreds of thousands of the bloody things. And I ate so many. I can't stand them. And what's the answer? Can people? I think you can tell the difference to the green ones. My favorites. But no others. Can't remember. I'm going to go. That's fascinating. I'm quite hungry now. Well, I am also hungry, but first I'm going to set up my Victorian dining room. Yes. To make sure that I've got the appropriate setting for digesting immediately afterwards. OK, listen, that is quite enough discussion of food drink is in the next episode. But you know what that means? It's time for... Dun, dun, dun, dun, dun. It's cura of the week. But not to play the jingle yet. Do you know why? Why? Because we've got a new jingle. This has been sent into us by Lauren Cooper. She is age 10.63835616, possibly a bit more, because that calculation was made a few weeks ago. That's a very accurate age. Yeah. I think that's... I mean, that's OK. That's too good. You mean it? You work that out. Anyway, so this is a new proposed jingle sent in by Curio Lauren Cooper. That's the best thing that's ever happened. That is the best thing that's ever happened. I mean, I'm stunned. I mean, not just the musical quality, too, but also the instruction never miss an episode. No, you're absolutely right. We endorse that view. And it's kind of subliminal. It's going to... You know, it's going to be a bit of a... I mean, I'm going to endorse that view. It's kind of subliminal. It's going to feed into people's minds, change their views. It's Lauren Rio 10. Well, 10 and 233 days, apparently. Very well worked out. She had a really did work that out with her calculator. She's very good at maths. That is completely brilliant. So listen, Lauren, you are massively Curio. It seems like every Curio of the week so far, this series has been Curio of the series. I know. They keep one up for you, too. I know. This makes it... There's a badge. There is... And we've got badges. We've actually got badges. We're actually sending out badges. They're actually, in fact, if you do end up getting a Curio of the week badge, then I would like to see a photo of you wearing it proudly. Or not proudly, and hiding it. And we don't want to see those badges on eBay. No. We definitely don't. All right, that is that for this episode. Next week's show. Well, it's even more festive, really, because to really get into the spirit of things, we're going to be talking about why we get hangovers. Merry Christmas. Well, hey, hello. So, before you stop listening, you can't start it with, hey, hello. We're not in California. Okay, go rowing. All right. Hello. I'm Rohan Solvah, and I'm an entrepreneur. And I'm Kamala Ahmed, and I'm not. We are launching a new podcast. It is about entrepreneurs and it's for everybody. It's called The Disruptors, and it features the world's best-selling, and it's a great, well-known, well-known and it's launching a new podcast. It is about entrepreneurs and it's for everybody. It's called The Disruptors, and it features the stories of founders, people of started businesses, how they did what they did, and all the challenges and ups and downs they went through to get there. Plenty of dark moments, and plenty of inspirational stories told by the people who experienced. Subscribe to The Disruptors on BBC Sounds.
