Back to one of my favourite topics for today's Scurious case. Yes, indeed. Doug, in Norfolk writes, why do we have different blood types? What evolutionary advantage could there be to this? Hannah, this is right up my street, a bit of evolution, a bit of gore, something I can really get my teeth stuck into. You're not that keen, though. Oh, yeah. Do you remember the case of the screen with Sweden? I do, when you tried it, and failed to make me faint. Well, yes. I feel very weak when we're even discussing blood. OK, then I will specifically avoid mentioning it, gushing from wounds, spurting out in jets from your... Absolutely. ..and I'm sorry. OK, I'm going to be brave about this one, though. And I'm going to confront it head on, and I'm going to speak to an expert. She and a Christianic immunologist at the University of Manchester. Well, we'll kick off with an easy one, then. How many blood groups do we have? I don't know. I don't know. I see one. We've got loads. We'll kick off with an easy one, then. We've got at least 23 blood group systems at the moment. People normally only talk about AB and O, don't they? That's correct, but that's just one of the blood group sets. But it's the one that's probably most familiar to us, because there's the one that we're most worried about in terms of things like transfusion reactions and donating blood. A rookie mistake there, Hannah. You can't expect a clear answer when it comes to biology. Cascurising these things is incredibly messy. There are loads of different types of blood groups. You don't get this problem with numbers. OK, I tell you what, let's bring it back to basics. Let's do some numbers. All of the blood groups that we're talking about here involve red blood cells, which transports oxygen around the body. Tell me more. OK, I will. The average adult human has around 30 trillion red blood cells. They make up a quarter of the total number of cells in the body. Every one of those cells makes a complete journey around your circulation once a minute. That means that in its three to four month lifespan each cell will do the equivalent of 150,000 laps around your body. And every second of every day, your body produces 2 million new red blood cells to replace the ones that have died and dead red blood cells are one of the things that makes poo brown. Wow, thanks. But not all blood or poo is the same, is it? Because we know this. Thanks to the semi-successful experiments of a British obstetrician called James Blunder. He performed the first recorded successful human-to-human blood transfusion in 1818. Now, the patient was a hemorrhaging woman who had just given birth. And he took blood from her husband's arm and used a syringe to transfuse it through to the wife. He then performed a further 10 transfusions, half of which were successful. Which means presumably that half were not true. But given these women were mostly on the verge of death, it may well have been their last chance. And the failures of those early transfusions were probably to do with blood group incompatibility. Right, okay. So this incompatibility arises because not everyone's blood looks the same. On the inside, it's all hemoglobin, but on the outside, there are slightly different proteins and carbohydrates that coat the cell. And this is where the different blood types come from, including the ABO system. Here's Joe Mountford from the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service to explain. So there's four main blood groups. So you can be blood group A, you can be B, you can be AB or O. So if you're a type A, you'll have the A antigen on your red blood cells. If you're a type B, you'll have the B antigen. AB will have both, and O will have neither. And those antigens are basically proteins with sugars stuck on them that stick out of the surface of the red cells. Now the key thing there is that your body is used to seeing red cells with those proteins on the surface. So if you give that person the same type of blood, that's not a problem for the body because it's seen that and before. However, if you're type A, for example, you will never have seen the B antigen. And if you then get exposed to B, that will cause the problems because your body sees that as far in a more freak out and will respond. And that's what we need to avoid with the transfusion reactions. So it's the white blood cells that are freaking out and attacking the red blood cells. Freaking out, that's not really the technical term, but yes, it is the immune system recognizing something that's not supposed to be there. Now that means if you're type O, you can be a universal donor because you don't have any of the little sugar coated antigens sticking out of your red blood cell. Okay, then if you put O type blood into somebody with types AB or AB, then there's no foreign bits for them to recognize as foreign. Exactly. And it's this type of blood that they keep in emergency rooms or air ambulances places where they don't really have the time to match your blood type, especially when there's gushing blood pulsing from a wide open hemorrhaging artery. Yeah, I'm still not cool with all the blood stuff going on here. Fine, but if you're type AB, then you're what's known as a universal recipient because you have both A and B antigens. You've seen everything before and you won't freak out when you encounter them. Hang on, why wouldn't a freak out not being a technical term, brotherhood? Now, according to Shina Krikshank, the immune reaction that you get when you mix incompatible blood types together was the key to how these different groups came to light in the first place. The way that it was discovered was a chap called Lann Steiner. He was doing some experiments and he was mixing up different bloods from different people. And he noticed sometimes he'd get a clumping reaction and that clumping reaction happened because people who are A type will make antibodies to the B type. And when you mix that up, it's basically like your antibodies coat it in felcro. So you kind of get this clump of all the blood cells or kind of coagulating together. So it's very visual. A sort of nice analogy is if you can imagine you've got a digestive biscuit, it's quite interesting, but then you cover it with chocolate and suddenly it's very exciting. And it's the same sort of thing. You get your red blood cell. It's something covered with antibodies and it's just like a comey me for a new response and it targets allodes and loads of immune cells. And that's just one of the things that happens as a consequence of antibody coating. Just slightly less appetizing and good for everybody than the chocolate digestive biscuit. Well, it's very good for you if it's bacteria or a parasite. It's super for you then. Listen, wouldn't make any difference? Your, your queesiness if we just referred to blood as chocolate biscuits from now on? Yeah, I think they would be helpful. Yeah. So when there's gushing chocolate pulsing from a wide open, then measuring artery. Let's help for. All right. Now, recognizing and crushing intruders is the basis of our immunity, but we have different types of defense mechanisms, including a complex system called adaptive immunity, which relies on an immune memory. And that is a major issue in another one of our blood groups, recess factor. Ah, right. I asked you in a correctional case about this. You did too. I did. The reason we care about recess factor is it's another one of these blood group antigens. And you either have the resist antigen or you don't, you resist positive or you're resist negative. And we care about it because of something called resist disease. So this happens when you have a mother who's got resist negative blood. And she has a partner who was resist positive. And that means that the baby has become resist positive. And then when the mom has the baby, if any of the blood mixes from the baby with the mom, it's possible that the mom would start to make antibodies. They would become what we call sensitized. It'll be fine. That first pregnancy, but because the mother is now sensitized, if they have a second baby or a third or a fourth, the mom will immediately start making antibodies towards the baby. It's sometimes called the blue baby syndrome. This seems like a quite fundamental flaw in evolutionary terms, doesn't it? Of a mother attacking her own baby. Yes. Well, yes, I guess so. But fortunately, it's screened for and we can manage it and we can treat it by giving antibodies that will block the mom's response and stop the mom attacking the baby's blood cells. I guess it's that whole idea of where geared up to be able to deal with anything that looks foreign. And to be brutally honest, when you have a baby growing inside you that's half somebody else's DNA, it is a kind of foreign object inside you. I say that as a mother who loves a children very much. Yeah, so as you say, not ideal. It does look like genetics plays a role though. The proportions of different blood groups change in different parts of the world. In India, for example, 40% are type B, whereas it's just 10% here in the UK. OK, well then if there's a genetic link that does bring us back to Doug's question, is there any evolutionary point to blood groups? Very good question, Dr. Fry and one that I put to Joe Mouthford. We don't wholly know that it's evolutionary. We don't understand what the pressure is on that. It's clearly genetic and an evolutionary because there's certain populations also of Native Americans who are entirely group O, for example. So we know it's genetically encoded. But what the significance of having a particular group is for other function within the body is not fully understood. And it's probable that it's just co-evolution and you have that blood group because that's what's within your population. There's not necessarily a specific pressure on it. So it's not natural selection? Well, that's what it looks like. Not all human traits have some evolutionary advantage. Some of them are just there because they're there. And they've spread through populations without any particular evolutionary selection. OK, but I discovered that there is some cultural significance to blood groups because in many East Asian countries, the main blood groups, ABNO, are treated a bit like astrology. So they make predictions of your personality and tell you about compatibility with your partners. And matchmakers and dating agencies even log and compare your blood groups to see if you're compatible. What are you making that? Well, that's complete nonsense. Why? So in conclusion, there is no real point to blood groups. It's just like of the evolutionary draw. Well, not quite. You see, there are some blood groups that do have an evolutionary purpose, such as the one we call Duffy. That's been associated with resistance to a strain of malaria. So people who lack the Duffy antigen are more resistant to one of the strains of malaria because malaria ultimately will infect your red blood cells. And there's another antigen as well that's been associated with resistance to another strain of malaria, plus modium falsyparum. So there's still some evidence of a couple of the antigen being associated with resistance to infection. But other than that, we don't know. Right. Let me get this straight. There are some blood groups that appear to have no evolutionary function, but some do. Biology, frustratingly messy, yet again. I know. That's what makes it fun. So, Dr. Weatherford, when it comes to the question of why we have different blood types, can we say K-Solt? Well, there are dozens of different blood groups, and we don't really know why we have them. But some may have some nifty tricks up their sleeve to defend us against parasites like malaria. And give someone the wrong type of blood and their immune system thinks it's foreign, and we'll react against these invaders. Technically known as freaking out. There we go. We managed to do the whole thing without mentioning pulsing arterial wounds, gushing form. Thank you very much, Adam. The end.
