I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. Science. I like it. MUSIC Hello and welcome to Series 6. 6. Of the curious cases. Insane. Of Fry and Rutherford. And this time round for you, for the dear podcast faithful, the people who choose to listen to us. To download us and have us in their ear. Listen to us rambling on. We're doing something slightly different because we wanted you to have access to the episodes long before they go out on Radio 4. And so we are going to be releasing a new podcast every Friday for the next five weeks. Next five weeks. So not all in one big dump. One deluge of Fry and Rutherford. Oh, God. This is an evolutionary biology. This is called similar parity versus itter-operity, where it's a reproductive strategy, where do you lay all your eggs at one time or do you stagger them out over a long period of time? Which is more successful. It depends what species you are. We're trying itter-operity this time round. OK. We've been doing similar parity. I mean, it did OK, semi-operity. Yeah. It did all right. Yeah, works fine. But sometimes it's nice to save a thing. Sometimes it's nice to do some itter-operity. And it's especially, basically, it's because the pod faithful who choose to listen to us, they deserve nice things because they're beautiful people. There are secret clubs of curiosity people. We need to give them a name. Maybe not that one. Writing, you can do that. We don't have the imagination. We come up with zero ideas. Very few Michelle comes up with most of the ideas. But you give us the ideas for the program. So send us to curiouscasesatbbc.co.uk, the name of the secret pod club. Yes. Yes, and we will feature it on a future pod. Yes. And you'll win prizes. Definitely. Definitely win prizes. There is a used water cup here that you have drunk from. Yeah, we're in Studio 50 AC, which is where they do women's hour. Women's hour. You could come and maybe look at Jenny Murray's chair. That's possible. We could send you a photo of Jenny Murray's microphone. Yes. And she's got special headphones as well. I just been asking her to film. I'm looking around to see what else we can give them. There's the mufflers. Those red mufflers are quite good. No, they are quite good. I don't think we can steal those there. Because then that's an actual prize. And then we have to weigh about competition. There aren't any prizes. There's the prize of glory. And that is worth more than physical objects. Correct. Today's programme is about cats. It's a brilliant question about cats. We got this question from Vicki Cole, who's from Kenya. And she was given a cat from a friend of hers. She lived about six kilometres away. Very beautiful cat. She saw a photo of it. And the cat just wasn't happy staying with Vicki. She wanted to go back to the friend. So we would continually try and navigate back the six kilometres to her friend's house. And there are loads of other stories like that of cats returning from even longer distances. Yeah, how do cats find their way home? And even do they find their way home? We will discover in the next few minutes. So here it is. MUSIC Welcome to the new series of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. Where my good colleague Dr. Rutherford over there. Hello. And mathematical legends, Dr. Hannah Fry over there. Hello. We endeavor to investigate your everyday science mysteries. So if there is something you have always wondered, let us know at curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. Now to kick off the new series, we have this conundrum sent in by Vicki Cole from Nairobi in Kenya. She asks, how on earth do cats find their way back to their previous home when they move house? You've got cats, haven't you, Adam? Yes, we've got two cats, Lushkin, who is a bit like a dog sort of sweet-natured, little bit dim. And her mother, Moxie, who is a black-hearted creature, who stalks around hissing at literally everything in our lives, she's basically a goth cat. I think, personally, I'm a bit more of a dog person, if I'm honest. I don't think any living creature will ever love me as much as my dog Molly does. Tragically, I think I might agree with you. Dogs, they're just a bit pathetic, aren't they? I love you so much. Of course, I'll get you stick back for you. Cats wouldn't do any of that whiny nonsense. Yeah, but they've got arrogant sense about them that I don't improve of. Cats, they would correct your grammar, if they could. They're less animals that are more conceited than cats. Fewer animals. Whatever. Now, let's begin, shall we? How did these pampered Moxies first set foot inside our homes? Domestic cats are all descended from the Arabian wildcat philous silvestris libaca for around 8,000 years ago. They first became popular pets, as far as we know, in ancient Egypt. Drawings of cats lounging in baskets at the feet of Pharaohs began to appear around 4,000 years ago. Fitting with their superior nature, royal cats were even mummified and buried in their own sarcophagus. The Greek historian Herodotus wrote that when a beloved cat died from natural causes in Egypt, all members of the household shaved their eyebrows as a mark of respect. Bit weird, but the Egyptians weren't that nice to cats. They also bred and sacrificed millions of them to use in religious rituals. Maybe that was just the really annoying ones. We are definitely going to get a complaint for this show. Anyway, listen back to the question in hand. How do cats find their way back to previous homes? Here's a story of a very determined cat called Eddie, as told by his owner, slash butler, Stuart Budden from Bristol. When we moved from our old house in Totodan, we moved to a new house, which was less than a mile as the crow flies, we would say. But a little while after, he disappeared. And we put up some signs and some posters, particularly where we used to live. And our neighbour's phone up and said, oh yes, we've seen Eddie. So we went down there and jangled our house keys. He come running up. He's very happy to see us. And then we bring him home. And then we hear for a few more days. And then all of a sudden he disappeared again. The cat came back. The cat came back. I thought he was a goner, but the cat came back. Cause he wouldn't stay away. The cycle continued. Eddie escaped. Stuart got the call from his old neighbour, went back to retrieve him, and bringing back to his new home, including one time, even with a broken leg, Eddie would escape from the house, jumping out of an upstairs window, and then went down to the old house in plaster. In the end, the lady who was phoning us up all the time and even bringing us back said, look, I think the best thing for us to do would be for us to look after him. And so she adopted Eddie. Eddie went to a little bit of Sylvia. Team back cause he wouldn't stay away. So Eddie abandoned his owners because he didn't like their new house. Typical cat. Listen, Eddie knew exactly what he was doing. He just got his room exactly the way he wanted it. And then he just got dragged away. But is this typical jerk cat behaviour? Here's Philine expert John Bradshaw from the University of Bristol's Wetschool, author of Cat Sense. That's a very usual thing for a cat to want to do. And that's because cats essentially get their security from the place where they live. Dogs get their security from humans, but cats comfort blanket, if you like, is the surroundings they find themselves in. You know, we kind of psych ourselves up for a house move. We know it's going to be traumatic. Cat just simply finds itself transported out of its familiar territory into somewhere. It doesn't know the fact that its owner is there is to begin with not remotely important. What the cat wants to do is get back to the place where it felt safe and secure. Are you saying they don't really love us? No, I'm not saying that. That's easily translated into that. I agree. They do love us, but their primary security is the place where they live. And once they're comfortable in that, then they're fine. They're very attentive and loving towards us. And they show it by all sorts of different behaviour that they do towards us. But they're too stressed to express that when they're outside their territory. But some of these distances are pretty extraordinary. I mean, Eddie, finding his home a full mile away, how do they actually do it? The first thing, I think we have to transport ourselves into the world of the cat, which is just like that of the dog, although less widely appreciated, is based on smells. So they tell where they are and they can navigate by means of smells. We don't quite know how they do it. We know a lot more about how dogs do it. But cats probably use exactly the same mechanism. So particularly if they were downwind of their familiar territory, they would be able to pick up the familiar smells of it, whether it was the fish and chip shop that was around the corner from their old house or whatever. Those smells will mean as much to a cat as the sign over the door of the fish and chip shop would mean to us. Everyone keeps saying, owner, cats don't have owners. They have butlers. That makes you a cat servant. It's true. Anyway, if it's the smells in the air, then perhaps we need to consider cats super senses. All factory experts Matthew Cobb from the University of Manchester told me about a very special sense, a sort of second nose, that cats have that humans are missing out on. Along with many other mammals, they have something called the vomeronazel organ, also sometimes called Jacobson's organ. And this is a patch of cells right in the roof of their mouth that enables them to detect very specific compounds which are often acting as pheromones. And any blisters who have got sheep or horses in particular during the spring, when the mating season's on, they may have noticed male horses doing something called a flatman response, which is when they curl their lips back and they bear their teeth and they kind of inhale through their mouth, go and then do it. Well, I'm doing it now, but it's radio. You can't see what I'm doing. But you raise your top lip. Okay, well, you haven't got it, so it's not the hard. But I think we should try. We should we need to try and emulate cat behavior. So, well, bears its teeth and it goes and it breathes in and then it sits there looking completely stone, staring to space and sniffing in, getting the air onto this Jacobson's organ, this vomeronazel organ. Okay, now let's just get back to the question. Could this be? Could this advance smell system that cats have? Could this be the basis of their ability to find their way home? All faction might sense a smell might be involved. I don't think there's any reason particularly to invoke the vomeronazel organ, because it seems certainly when you watch cats doing this, it's very, very short distance, it appears. The first thing that I'd question is whether they do have that ability to find their way home. So anecdotally, and that's all we have to go on. Unfortunately, nobody's done a randomized control study of letting cats out of cars at varying distance away from their home and then seeing how many of them actually come back. My guess is that what we read about in the papers are those events when the cat came home from hundreds of miles away. And you know what? We never hear about all those poor old buses that are lost hundreds of miles away from where they should be. Maybe we should put in a grant for that. I'm afraid for it. I'm afraid for it. I'd take 1,000 cats and deposit them at various points to down the M1. What could go wrong? What, indeed? They go in, cats aren't that good after all, because as we know, dogs have a much better sense of smell. May I refer you to sniffer dogs? You may, that is true, although their Jacobson's organ isn't as sensitive. Now, we don't have good data on this, but as Matthew pointed out, there are lots of stories about cats traveling huge distances, like Holly the cat, who traveled 200 miles down the Florida coast back to her old home after getting lost on holiday. Yeah, anecdotal evidence. And she hitched a lift on a motorhome, clearly. Well, maybe, but what about the lovely tales from the mid-60s of two dogs and a cat that returned home 250 miles from Canada? Yeah, that one was a Disney film. Was it? But it seems pretty common, though, that cats can find their way back to an old house if they live fairly close by. True. So what strategies do they use to navigate? And how do their skills compare to our K-9 shums? Here's who will just John Bradshaw again. What they do when they are in a new territory is explore it in a very systematic way, so they'll go out in ever-increasing circles. They'll literally construct a mental map in their heads. And so a cat that's lost its territory probably does the same thing. They'll rely on the idea that if they go out in ever-increasing circles or rectangles, and eventually, they will either come across the territory or they'll come across a smell carried on the wind of the territory that they used to live in and then be able to get home. OK, here's the thing, though. If cats aren't really that good at navigating, how come you always see lost cat posters on that posts? I think what happens in urban environments, particularly, is the cat panics when it finds itself somewhere unfamiliar. And so at some point, the cat will either get chased by another cat or a dog, or it will have to run off to avoid getting run over by a car. Then it gets lost. Then it loses the mapping information that it has in its head. So which is better at finding their way home than cats or dogs? There are not reliable records of either, really, in terms of navigation. But if you consider where they came from, evolutionarily speaking, dogs came from walls which range over very large areas, literally hundreds of square miles. Wild cats are territorial animals, most of which probably never stray more than a few miles from the place where they were born in their whole lives. And so the ability to navigate over long distances is probably never become particularly important, whereas for a wolf, it is important. If you get separated from your pack, you need to get back to the pack. And so we would assume that dogs have inherited some of that at least and can find their way home over much longer distances. See now what I'm mostly hearing is that dogs are just better. Well, now I think dogs are better at lots of things, but they're much less self-reliant. The main thing in a dog's life is a person to follow. So cats are much better at being cats than dogs are at being dogs, because dogs need a human and cats just need somewhere to snooze. Doctor Fry, our listener asked how cats find their way back to previous homes. Can we say, case solved? Yes, they travel out from base in concentric circles to produce a mental map of their home turf. And their superior sense of smell helps them to create landmarks to navigate over short distances. So when they move house, they just need to sniff some familiar smells to reorientate themselves on their mental map, which can help them find their way back to the old pat. And this conclusively proves that cats are better than dogs. The end? No, it doesn't. You know, I think I may have slightly misrepresented myself in this program in pretending that I dislike cats more than I do, because actually they're fine. They're fine. You know, I've cuddled a cat in the past. No, I'm not a cat. A tickled a cat's chin. You can't be neutral about cats. You can't just say they're fine. Cats are clearly superior animals to most animals. Not dogs, though. Most animals, including dogs. Yeah, that's just not true, though, is it? If you were going to have a familiar, if you were a witch or a wizard, no one on earth would choose a dog to be more familiar. You know what? You can train a dog, yeah, to find your remote control and bring it to you. What can a cat do? Nothing. A cat. Maybe it manages to go to the toilet in a litter tray. That's it. You want to study that. You want to be able to, in trap another species, to do exactly all bidding, to be able to do all that. Well, that's exactly what's happening with the cats. Just the other way around. You're the one that's trapped. That is true. That is so true. I mean, cats do almost nothing for you. That why do I have cats? Does it sleep on your head, as well? Oh, God. Lushkin comes into our bedroom at night sometimes if we leave the door open and does this really aggressive form of purring in my face. The thing about cats is that you can never try to orientate themselves so you either get the bum or the face from one go and then she'll come in and go, and it sounds like we're being attacked. Like a doodle bug is dropping on the house and it's just Lushkin wanting some attention. Yeah, you don't get that with dogs. All right, but something that came up in the program with Matthew Cobb's interview, which is pertinent here, is that dogs don't do flirmin' faces. Now, I wasn't there for the interview that you had with Matthew. So this flirmin' face, I've only got this sort of description of it. I want to see what it looks like. I've missed out. Basically, you have to take a top lift and sort of... You tucked it under. You got a tucky top lift under. That's quite hard. All right, so you've got a bit of ampighatee. Yeah. And then you make a sort of... No, but in hailing. I'm trying. Yeah. I feel like I'm drinking tea again. That from series one or two. And those are your choices. So you do a top lift and then flirmin' face to go... And then you have to look his words stoned. All right, that's what Professor Matthew Cobb described. I can take a photo of you. Very stoned. I can take a photo of you. We'll put it on Twitter. Here it goes. So here's Dr. Sutherford's flirmin' face. I'm done. Go on, do it. That is deeply attractive. And then you have to do your own one. Give me the phone. Okay. Oh, God. You know. You were clenching your fists. Sort of concentrating. I know. That's no retakes. That's going online. Oh, get to the lip. Listeners, we want the pod listeners to send in their flirmin' faces. So we can compile a list of what people look like when they're trying to do. This amazing smell thing that cats can do. Mainly not great. Right, well that's enough flirmin' faces. We will put up the best or the worst on our programme page. In the meantime, if you have any other questions that you would like me to investigate, by which I mean send Michelle to investigate, then please do send them to curiouscasesatbbc.co.uk And pictures of your face doing stupid things like this. One more time. We'll just finish with this. More next Friday. This is the BBC.
