I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. Welcome back. This is series... Thithy! All we're going with series N or N plus one. I don't really understand maths. What you can do is you can say, let's call it N prime. Oh, nice. Equals N plus one, right? Yeah. And then you can redefine N at any time. Yeah. Oh, nice. So with that, what does series one then? Is that N? I mean, I can just make it out. Is that maths? There's been some points in maths where I've said that three was equal to infinity, approximately. How does that work? That's the beauty of maths. You just make things up. Do it again. I don't like this. Anyway. So one plus one doesn't even need to equal two? My whole world is being shattered. Stop. Anyway, look, we are back. Series 15, we've got a whole amazing set of five, six questions coming up. I can't count. Lots. Lots. So many. But it's definitely... N is... Less than seven. We're back in the real world, though, and in particular, and specifically, something you can find within the world. Gold. This is a whole episode on gold, and where it comes from and how it's made. That is a terrible link. Whatever. Let's do it. Welcome back to series 15 of the curious cases of Rutherford and Frye. Where we answer your questions using the power of science. And today's question is a real gem. Hmm. Technically a precious metal. Whatever. It was sent into curious cases at BBC.co.uk by Paul Ruddick, who asks... How is gold made inside the earth? And why haven't we found a way to replicate the process? Could this be finally, Hannah, our road to riches? No. Certainly not. If thousands of years of trying is anything to go by, because the quest to make gold has a long and very unfruitful history in the art of alchemy. It all started with secretum, secretorum, the secret of secrets. A magical philosophy text supposedly written by Aris Dottler himself. And passed down the ages by Arabian scholars. They enshrined these alchemic secrets in the Emerald Tablet, a coded message describing how the heavens above influenced the earth down below. During the Middle Ages, European alchemists pursued these ideas with further. They decoded the tablet, which claimed that the seven known planets in space created seven different metals on earth. Saturn made lead, and the sun produced gold. Achieving perfection became the aim of alchemy, both spiritual and scientific, from finding the elixir of everlasting life, to creating the perfect metal, like gold, according to material scientists Mark Madovnik. Gold was seen to be a perfect form of matter. It was not a pure form matter, because it was made up of immutables, a mixture of mercury and sulfur. And people thought that copper was a different mixture of mercury and sulfur, and lead was a different mixture, and iron was a different mixture. So basically, it sort of made sense in everyone's head that if they were just different mixtures, if you could somehow change them, you could get gold. So what how did they attempt to do it? There was this idea that was something called the philosopher's stone. Almost we would think of it as a catalyst. It would change one into the other, and you needed to find the philosopher's stone in order to have the ability to change lead into gold. So how did you make the philosopher's stone? Well, that was what we would call the occult. It was all shaded in mystery. People coded their recipes. Most of the alchemists were like this, very secretive. Right, so there was this secret philosopher's stone that could help turn sulfur and mercury into other metals. But why do you think they used those particular elements? Partly because the chemistry can do with those is incredible. Mercury in particular is a liquid metal at room temperature, mysterious, wonderful, clearly special. But it dissolves gold. So you can take a piece of gold and they did, and you can dissolve it in mercury. Now it just looks like mercury, slightly yellow or worse in the mercury. You could do that backstage, then you could come out front stage in front of a king, for instance, and say, I can do alchemy, and then he could say, prove it. You heat up the mercury, the mercury evaporates, you get left with a lump of gold. Well, that sounds like a con trick. I mean, is it charlatans or is it scientists? They knew that they weren't turning mercury into gold at that point, but the people in the audience didn't know that. Of course, there was a huge wealth at stake here. In fact, there was an act of parliament prohibiting the attempt to change-led into gold, because the crown was so wide, it would undervalue the wealth of the nation. So we're alchemists just trying to make a quick buck by tricking people into thinking they'd made gold then? Well, not all of them. There definitely were a bunch of con artists. They were called puffers, and they'd turn these kind of tricks to make money. But there was a very much more serious scientific side. So Isaac Newton actually translated the emerald tablet, and he wrote more on alchemy during his life than pretty much any other subject. Ernest Rutherford. No relation. He's no relation of mine proudly called himself an alchemist, as indeed did Robert Boyle, who was, in fact, instrumental in repealing the act of parliament, the one that Mark mentioned just then, which banned alchemists from attempting to make gold. OK, but we now know those ideas are impossible, right? But Newton wasn't a puffer. I mean, did these ideas have some use? Yeah, absolutely. Alchemy was basically the foundation of chemistry and science experimentation as a whole, because what they did, what Newton did, was systematic. It was recordable. It was repeatable and wrong. Very wrong. OK, but getting back to today's question, if you can't make gold with alchemy, we're going to need to look a little bit further afield. So I put Paul Rellick's question to our curious cosmologist Andrew Ponson. All right, Andrew, the question that we had in was, how is gold made inside the earth? Well, I'm going to disappoint you, because it is not made inside the earth. Where is it made then? It was made before the earth formed or the whole solar system formed. And it's part of this sort of grand cosmic process that we call nuclear synthesis, basically building lots of different elements from the raw building blocks that the universe was born with. Talk me through it there. So OK, building blocks, sure. How does that give you gold? Gold is just one type of atom. And atoms are made out of smaller constituents called protons and neutrons. So if you want to make an atom of a particular type like gold, in effect, all you need to do is get the right number of protons and the right number of neutrons and put them together in a small enough space. And that gives you the nucleus for your gold atom. But the way you're describing it sounds like it's quite deliberate, but this is something that happens automatically. Yes, it's something that happens automatically in space. And when the universe is born, it has only very simple particles, like the individual protons and the individual neutrons. So what you have to do is find suitable places in space where you can bring those protons and neutrons together and kind of ram them together actually really hard so that they kind of fuse into that individual gold atom. Yeah, but it needs to be somewhere very hot, very energetic and very massive. Is that a great of Norton J. I get them? I meant a star. Sure, okay, a star. Right, well who better to take us inside the life of the stars than solar scientists Lucy Green? Within the cause of stars like our Sun, you have really extreme conditions, of really high temperatures and really high pressures because of all the massive the star pushing down on the center. And in that environment, we're able to have a process take place that's called nuclear fusion. So literally the nuclei of different elements coming together to build into heavier elements. In the most simple scenario, you're able to turn hydrogen into helium and create a new chemical element and you start the process of having stellar factories that can create the chemical elements that ultimately we know today. In fact, our own star, the Sun, it's only at the start of this journey fusing hydrogen into helium with a rather useful byproduct sunlight, which has allowed life on earth to flourish. Just like plants and creatures, stars have their own life cycle from birth to death. Stars very much go through evolutionary phases. They're born and they live and they die. You can think about the hydrogen fuel inside the star as being limited. And once that fuel runs out, the fusion process then has nothing to work on. So the star is able to collapse in on itself a bit because it doesn't have the energy and the heat to sort of keep it puffed out. But that collapse of the core of a star actually increases the density and increases the temperature. And then something really interesting can happen. Within that hotter environment, you can start to build helium into the next set of heavier chemical elements like carbon and oxygen. And so inside the most massive stars, you can end up building chemical elements through the periodic table up until the element iron. And the interior of the star ends up being like an onion. Iron at the centre and then shells of successively lighter elements as you go out. So giants tell onions then, is that what we're saying? Right, well it all comes from the concept of the cosmic soup. Go on. Because you could say that some stars are like shallots because they're little and they only contain a few lighter elements, whereas other massive stars are like giant Spanish onions with lots and lots of layers right into the heavier elements in the middle. I think you might be stretching this analogy a little bit too far now, hasn't. But Lucy, of course, she mentioned that these stars make all of the elements up to iron. Correct, that's the giant Spanish onion. Again, need you to start talking about onions. But of course, gold is heavier than iron as we know from the periodic table. Yeah, so to recap, if we're trying to discover how gold is made, we've established that it's not made by alchemy, it's not made inside the earth. It's not made in the core of stars or even in the centre of onions. This is pointing. And in fact, the origin of all of the gold on earth is even more brilliant. According to someone who really does know their onions. Thank you. Andrew Ponson. It was made most likely, either in the death throws of a dying star or possibly in the collision of two neutron stars. So basically, it's made in very exotic places in space. There are a couple of plausible ways you can do it. One is wait for a really massive star to reach the very end of its life. It runs out of all the fuel that it could use for regular nuclear fusion. And then it kind of explodes out in a final burst of fusion, generating all sorts of heavy elements, including probably gold. And another thing that you can do is merge to neutron stars. And neutron stars, they're not like regular stars at all. They've actually already come to the end of their regular life and collapsed in on themselves. And got extremely dense, almost to the point that they create a black hole. But just at the last moment, the whole process of collapsing the star stops. And you're left with what is effectively a sort of star-sized nucleus, just a giant bunch of neutrons. If you then throw two of these neutron stars at each other and believe it or not, this does actually happen out in space, then that process is so cataclysmic that you end up with all sorts of new elements being manufactured very, very quickly. And that certainly would include gold. And that actually happened. Yeah, so in 2017, when gravitational waves were discovered from this humongous collision of two superdent neutron stars, as soon as those gravitational waves were spotted, astronomers all around the world, they pointed their massive telescopes at the source. And low and behold, they saw infrared light that was characteristic of gold with a little bit of platinum thrown in, just to blink up a little bit more. Right, so that's in deep space, and it's a long way from Earth. So how does it end up on Earth? Well, of course, planets form from the dust and debris that's just floating around in space. And that's going to include bits of exploded stars. So in a way, those alchemist were right. Stars do produce gold. Just you need a very, very big star that is much bigger than our sun, and it has to collapse into a neutron star first. Now, on previous curious cases, we've heard that you can create new elements right here on Earth using particle accelerators. So I asked material scientists, Mark Madovnik, why we can't just bypass all of this ridiculous exploding star business and just make gold ourselves like proper alchemists, but with 21st century tech. We can, and people have done it. The Soviets did it in their nuclear reactors. They found that they led was turning into gold in some of their reactors because of the nuclear reactions occurring inside, essentially. People have done it in other more controlled conditions around the world. So it's done. It's just that it's really expensive. It's much more expensive than mining. And also what you get left with is a whole load of radioactive waste, which contaminates the gold that you might then be trying to sell or give someone as a gold ring for your love. Yeah, radioactive gold rings, not very romantic. I think you've got a gold tooth, haven't you? I have. There it is. It's pretty special to think that actually there in your mouth, or maybe if you've got a wedding ring, you're actually carrying around a bit of a exploded neutron star. Yeah, I mean, gold remains the most culturally valued metal, even though it's not the most expensive. And I definitely love having a gold tooth. Listen, as it is at the back, it's not like proper gangster bling going on here. I just think the fact that gold is very unreactive. So it lasts through centuries. So this gold in my mouth, it's not just it's journey from the star to earth, but it's it's journey within history and civilization because we value this material so much. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to how gold is made on a, can we say case solve? Yes, Dr. Fry, we can. It isn't. It is created in a process called nucleosynthesis. First, new elements are formed inside stars, but that only goes from helium all the way up to iron and heavier metals need an extra injection of energy. Exploding supernovae or colliding neutron stars for heavy elements like gold. So that bling on your finger is the product of a cosmic mega explosion millions of years ago. So there was gold and I was restricted from singing Spandovalet, but don't worry, there will be plenty of singing in a later episode. We will come to that when the time is right. I won this battle, but I have definitely lost that one. Now, one of the things we enjoy talking about in that, with Mark Medovnik, was the idea of the philosophers' stone. Now, you, Henna Fry, have a certain punch-hunt for a wizarding boy. Yeah, I mean... Almost obsessive. I wouldn't go that far. You do have lots of Harry Potter artwork on your walls. Yeah, do you buy it for me? One, one, but when I saw it in place, it was next to about 15 other quite cool Harry Potter based artwork. Okay, the thing is there to be fair. I think the part of the reason why is that I was, I think, 16 when Book 4 came out. Which one was the trousers of doom? Harry Potter and the Elephant of Destiny. Yes, exactly. Which one was it? The Goblet of Fire? Yes, exactly. I know, that's very well. The kitchen sink of mystery. That was a good one. Yeah, so I think that's part of it. It's just, you know, very evocative of... A certain era. Yeah. Do you like them? I think they're terrific. I absolutely love them. And I love reading them out to my children from beginning to end and it was quite emotional at the end. You know, you know, some people say they don't like them. Well, they're wrong. I don't trust them as people. Exactly. Why, whispering. Because I don't want everyone to know. Oh, you see. You know, I just kind of think that, I just kind of think, I think if you don't like Harry Potter and you've read them all, I'm not saying it has to be super obsessive with them, but if you actively don't like Harry Potter, then you are incapable of joy. LAUGHTER That's my opinion. Well, do write in to specifically to Hannah, if you disagree with that point, the last thing I want. You managed to alienate yourself from Trekkers Star Wars. Trekkies, no. Oh, we've been through this. I'm sorry. They don't like that. Sorry, I feel good as a wrong way around. Sorry. Trekk, something. Just direct all of your eye towards Hannah Fry at Hannah Fry. You know what, though? The flusper stage is an actual thing, isn't it? Yes, yes, it was. It's not a magic thing that makes you go magic. I can't remember what the story is, isn't that one? What does it do? It's a magic thing that makes you go magic. Go on. Yeah, and it turns you into a snake or something, and you can speak snake. Carry on. But look, the flusper zone was a real thing, was a real concept, is a real thing. Anyway, I asked Mark Mendoff, Nick, what it was. So there's a continual change in what that thing might be, and again, it's sort of mysterious. The word stone itself sort of invokes a physical object, but some people were distilling spirits and what we call solvents now. Also, they were trying to find out whether this thing called quintessence might be the flusper stone. And quintessence was the ether that they thought must exist in the heavenly spheres for light to get through to us. It must be a medium, they call the ether or quintessence. Maybe that was a flusper stone, and though maybe you could find it, you could distill it, and then you could turn then into gold. It's all very easy for us, in the 21st century, to mock these ideas. But how long did it last? At what point did they give up and say, you know what, this really isn't working? It's ancient, and it is the foundations of chemistry. So in lots of ways, you might look back at it and say the way they were going about it with experiments, and people like Boil and Newton were doing it very systematically, that was the modern practice of chemistry, which becomes chemistry as it comes more evidence-based, and the practice of doing very careful experiments and recording them and people critiquing them. So it's just the kind of early version of chemistry, if you ask me, but it is also kind of connected to religious belief and the idea of the perfect divinity of materials, and of course, I totally agree with them. Materials are... Yes, and most of the things. Professionals of material science. That Newton thing, absolutely fascinating, because he was an alchemist, is that a time when science is beginning to be formulated into the thing that we recognize today? But he's definitely still on the track of, this is a concept that exists, and I'm going to force nature, or I'm going to try to force nature to adhere to my previously existing beliefs. Totally. I mean, it's not just that. It's not just alchemy and chemistry, right? There's astronomy and astrology, there's sort of quackery and real medicine. This is all around the time of the Royal Society being founded, everything swirling around together. You can't distinguish the two of these things, the only way that you can tell the difference between the pseudoscience and the science is whether it's reproducible and verifiable. And that really was this big moment at that point in history. Yeah, we both love this branch of the history of science and the formulation of the thing that we call science today. And that Royal Society references in form because there's this, their motto, which is above the door, we sometimes get to go to the Royal Society, which is quite a treat down in Central London, near Picadilly. Not very often, they look as a bit weird, but... You have to call ahead. Are you sure you're allowed here? Just turn up. You have to get an appointment with someone who is a member of this society. An important person. Yeah. But their motto is, the Latin is Nullius in Verba. It translates directly as nothing in words, but actually what it means is, take nobody's word for it. And that's just the cornerstone of the modern scientific method and Newton was a founder member of the Royal Society and as was Boyle and Christopher Ren and named some others. All then important ones. Then Blokes with Wigs. Hook. He was one. Yeah, but he wasn't wigged. No. They didn't like him. No. Well, Newton didn't at least. Wasn't that line standing on the shoulders of giants? A dig at Hook. That, yeah. Because he wasn't very tall. Yeah, well, he was a slightly hunched figure and he was short. Some historians of science have suggested that that was a subtle dig by Nuson towards Hook. Because the full phrase is a dwarf sees further by standing on the shoulders of giants. And because the phrase is taken from the Greek myth of Orion the Hunter who temporarily blinded puts his dwarf servant on his shoulders so he can actually see. So there's some people are speculative that actually it was Newton just having a, you're a tiny, tiny, tiny man. It was Newton was not a nice guy. And then hundreds of years later we've got it wrapped around our two-pound coins and everyone thinks it's this lovely thing. But actually it was just 17th century snark. He was Newton throwing some shade on a better experimentalist or that is going to annoy people. Do write in if you disagree with me there. Ooh, that's a history of science throw downs just a bit. Whoa mate. Whoa. Bring it, if you'd like to bring it, email us if you like. If there are any historians of science who know much more about this than we do, curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. And talking of people who have sent in stuff to curious cases at BBC.co.uk, other than just debates about 17th century snark, it's time. Fuck you're over the week. Fast and curious occasion, the least curious, totalingy cheek. Rather than a fries, curiote of the week. All right, now this is an email which, I mean, it grabbed our attention by the, it grabbed our attention from the beginning sentence. Certainly did. Citizen SNIP. AKA the gentleman for cure. Master of the mind floss, mind floss that brings up a weird image to me. But the man with the world's strongest face. Right. That is the name of the person who sent this in. Right. So the subject was new listener, many questions. He did have a lot of questions, including this one. My final question, we got a lot of the relevant. There was some editing involved in this program. My question is, is geared more towards Adam? Partly being due to being more biology based and partly due to the accompanying images attached, which I believe will likely trouble Hannah. So now I'm excited. I am a side show performer. I set the Guinness World Record for the heaviest weight lifted by mental floss, AKA mind floss or skull floss in 2013. And the record still stands today. Oh. I should I take over? Oh, God. Do you need me to take over? Yeah. This is awesome. And you looked at the photos. No. OK, he goes on. This isn't a SNP, AKA all those rest of those things. The stunt involves threading a chain through my nasal cavity and out of my mouth. And using it to lift things, the record being 15.8 kilograms. Good Lord. Oh, let's have a look at it. OK, but that is absolutely. That's not very nice. I don't like it. It's brilliant. I don't like it. It's in his mouth. Oh, no, I don't like it. Let me just describe this. So, so, so, citizen SNP is wearing a top hat. And he has an excitable look on his face. He has a piece of string, which is coming out of his mouth and out of one nostril. And his action indicates that he's flossing. But I don't understand how it's going through. I don't understand. Well, you know, you know how like if you... Is it going in? Yeah. In his nose and then down the back part, into your farrocks and then out of your mouth. My brother used to be able to do this. No, I don't want to know about it. He used to really, really annoy my mum because he did it at the dinner table. I don't think I can do it. Hannah's taking her headphones off and leaving the studio. This is amazing. We're going to keep going. So anyway, I'll be even into the question here. My main question is theoretically, how much mass could I left before causing serious damage to my maxilla kind of... Zero grams. Zero grams. So, maxilla is your facial bone underneath the eyes and into the top jaw. So, he's also included a photo of him. Hammering a nail into his nose. Don't like it. It's horrible. It also includes a photo. Please do not do this at home. Or outside of home. Or anywhere. She's lifted. Hannah has literally rotated in her chair and is away from the mic. Look, SNIP, I think you're awesome. I mean, really, really awesome. You're not going to reward this with a bad eye because he's going to just pin it to his face. Yes. And I want to see that. Look, SNIP, we're not medical doctors. So, we're also not structural engineers. So, I don't think we can give you an answer. But, I mean, there's some dichotomy in the room here. Because I am going to give you the world's first curious case, his world record. And I think you should get a badge. Hannah's less sure. She's got a bit pale. You're right. I just don't understand. Look at the photo. I just don't understand how that would be any form of fun. You've got your ears pierced. What you could do as well, the other option, you could get under a two-way E.I. scream and watch Princess bride. That's a different way to spend an afternoon. Life is pain, heinous. Anyone who says any different is selling something, there you go, I've got a film quote in as well. So, we're awaiting other world records for the curious cases world record of which SNIP is our first winner. Can we have nicer ones, too, though, please? We can have nicer ones. I think it's really important that we say that you don't have to lift heavy things with any body parts, especially your face. You don't have to do that. SNIP has opened that account and has closed it too. Yeah, that should be a rule. That when it comes to the curious cases world records, it's not the best or biggest or most that win. Just the first. Yeah. Just the first. As soon as one world record opens, it immediately closes again. So, please, an earnest request, no more facial lifting. No more facial lifting. But SNIP, faquiere of gentlemanness, master of mind floss, you do have the world's strongest face and you are curious of the week. Hmm. Next week, we've got a special episode for Valentine's Day, all about the science of love. See you next week. Don't put that picture near me. I love you and everything. You've always had an episode. You've always had an episode. You've always had an episode. You've always had an episode. You've always had an episode. You've always had an episode. You've always had an episode.
