I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. It's the last episode in the current run of the curious cases rather than a fry. Hooray! Well not hooray is ending but we will be back for series 12. I mean I stop counting after eight to be honest. I count every single minute. Thing is they in this episode now we've made Michelle run and then between us we regret making Michelle run. I regret it maybe four times more than you. A little bit more because the thing is what we forgot about Michelle is that she's the one that makes all the decisions about what goes in the program. So this episode is about pain and you can guess what happens next. Yeah here we go. Bring the pain. A painful subject in this episode. Yes sent into curious cases at BBC.co.uk by someone that I'm not entirely that keen on called Claire Jenkins from Cumbran in Wales. A bit harsh Adam. Claire asked why do people experience pain differently when they go through the same event. Oh is this the bit that you've got an issue with? Because she goes on to say can you test Adam's pain threshold all in the name of science of course. All in the name of science. Now never want to miss the opportunity to inflict some form of psychological or actual physical damage to me. Our producer Michelle bundled me on to a train to Oxford to meet professor of pain Irene Tracy. When we want to understand pain we tend to inflict pain experimentally using three different modalities. One is the thermal domains we might burn you or we might freeze you. The other one is the chemical domains. I'm going to put some chili pepper cream on you and then the third type is mechanical. That's sort of where we'll poke them. What joy I have in front of me. Thank you everyone involved in this whole process. Right so first we'll get the capsacin on this. This is a chili pepper cream I'm going to put some gloves on which basically binds to a very specialized receptor just underneath the skin. We call them no susceptors. It basically communicates to things in the outside world that are going to hurt you. So this is just like a sort of thick mustard coloured cream that you've just put on my forearm. Yep and just rubbing it in so it can tickle those no susceptors. What you might start to feel in the next few minutes is some prickling sensation slightly itchy and over 30 minutes it might well start with cooking up and it'll get hotter and hotter and warmer and warmer and then if I start to poke around it will be a lot more painful now. And what feedback do you want from me? For most pain studies we tend to ask people to rate between zero, no pain and 10 excruciating. Excruciating would be slamming your hand in a car door. And this is what we're measuring a cute pain there aren't. This is a cute pain exactly and this is really important. So a cute pain is good pain. It tells you something's wrong get away from it. Something's been injured look after it. It is your body's alarm system. Well I for one I'm looking forward to hearing you experience some good pain later. Bring it you may bring the pain. So okay as our resident bar just Adam what do we know about how pain works? What's interesting is the incredible amount that we still don't know about pain and how many misconceptions there are about how pain actually works. Right so what happens if you put your hand on the stove when it's hot? Is this a trick question you get pain in your hand? Interestingly the pain isn't actually inside your burnt hand it's a sensation that's created by your brain as a reaction to the damaged tissue. Hang on are you saying that it's not your hands that hurts it's your brain? What kind of so the no-seceptors under the skin they receive the Bernie hand signal which rushes up to the brain which then produces the perception of pain and carries the sensation back down to your hand and then it starts to hurt so you take your hand off the stove pretty damn quick. Okay but all of this has happened pretty quickly otherwise your hand's going to fry. Yes and the speed is governed by the kind of nerve fiber carrying the signal so there are two types of pain fiber A delta which produces a kind of like fast pain sensation like a pin prick and then there are C fibers which produce a slow throbbing kind of pain like when you stub your toe. That is a bad pain right there. Now for people living in constant chronic pain the idea of being pain free sounds well wonderful but what would life be like if you'd never experienced pain at all? My name is Stephen P. I'm 37 years old and I live in Kelso, Washington. I was born with a reginetic condition where I do not feel physical pain. After Steve was born it didn't take long before his parents realized that something was a miss. That was going through the teething process and started chewing on my tongue and I chewed off a pretty significant portion of it and that alerted my parents that someone was definitely wrong with me so they took me to my pediatrician. This was 1981 so we didn't have genetic testing available back then so what they did was it took kind of like a bunch of burner and they put it underneath my foot just enough toward my skin started blister and I didn't have a negative response to that. As shocking as that test may seem what followed was even tougher. Over the course of his lifetime Steve reckons he's broken about 80 bones in everything from genuine accidents to childhood misadventures. Like the time he and his brother decided to jump off the roof of their house for a laugh. I mean those are kind of like the wild wild risk that you can take growing up. It's just when you're younger you're a lot more carefree with what it is that you're doing and if you don't feel pain you can do it regardless. So do you think when you're younger not having any sensation of pain made you more of a risk take at than other kids? Oh definitely we just always kind of take everything to the extreme my brother and I did. A lot of our childhood was spent in hospital. Longest day was about 14 months. Also I fractured recently three rubri but I went probably nine months without seeing a doctor for that. You were walking around with a broken back for months and you had no idea. Yeah. I mean that's dangerous right? Yeah that's probably the most dangerous injury I've had yet just because it could have crippled me. Wow and to think that we sort of fantasize about having a pain-free life. We're actually having pain is incredibly important and on that note you know I think it's time that you experience some incredibly useful protective pain and to find back at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford, Irene Tracy, I should meet into her house of pain. We're just now in some of the main hospital but we just come to one of our clinical pain testing rooms otherwise known as our torture chamber. So what we have here is a box oddly named the pin prick box. So this looks like proper medical torture equipment. It's a Teflon tube that has a weight in it that will plunge a sharp needle onto your skin with a different force. Experimentally what we often use them for is to explore this phenomenal and called central sensitization which is a really key mechanism in chronic pain. It's a fancy word for the central nervous system is amplifying inputs that come in. So what I'm going to do is take off this plaster. We're just containing the chili pepper cream because of that cream being there for 45 minutes. It's spoken to the spinal cord. It's set off the central sensitization. So now when I poke around there it's going to be a lot more painful than if I poked before we put the cream on. So let me just poke around there with this one in this area. You can really feel that. Yes. Oh yeah he's grimacing poor I'm sorry I'll just do a few more. Out. You know the interesting question is why do we have this phenomenon and maybe it's there to make the pain worse to remind us. Is this warning me this is a sensitive delicate area which needs to be protected. So it's a perfectly normal reaction. The big question is why in chronic pain does it not switch off? I might be getting a bit more painful than that. Yes not to worry it really did. So okay this is the question though. Do we all have different pain thresholds? Is my pain different to your pain? Yes it is because pain is a subjective experience. It's experiencing side-hour brains and it's not just the biological manifestation of pain is there are loads of other social environmental factors. So if you test the same person on different days they may react differently or with different experimenters. It depends on mood, on how distracted you're feeling or if the person is trying to look tough on the radio. Or I cannot deny I didn't want to appear extremely tough and insensitive. I don't think we're having much fear of that. But as we know pain is protective so if you don't feel pain at all like steep heat it is extremely difficult for your body to repair itself. Years of injuries can take a shocking toll as they did very tragically on his younger brother Chris who had the same genetic condition. He was an outdoorsman he enjoyed hunting and fishing and he had very bad back injury and it just continued to get worse for him as he got older and the doctors told you know hey you've probably got maybe a year left of being able to walk before you're going to be on wheelchair. That compounded with everything else it was just too much for him. Sadly his brother couldn't live with a lifetime of severe injuries that never got a chance to heal and he took his own life ten years ago. But there is a happy ending to this story. Steve has gone on to have two daughters of his own. As soon as they were born he waited anxiously in the delivery room to see if they felt pain. It wasn't genetic test or anything like that. Pretty much the deal was just pinched them and then they cried and that was good enough. Well that must have been a huge relief for you as a parent. Oh yeah you don't want to see your children in pain but you also don't want to see them injuring themselves and not knowing it. I mean it's difficult for raising children who feel pain but raising children who don't feel pain. That's that's just tough. So by studying people like Steve we've learned a huge amount about how pain works and then there was a big discovery in the UK recently that his condition is caused by a mutation in a single gene which has the effects of interrupting the signal from the nerves to the brain. So the brain doesn't create a pain response. Right so it turns the pain dial all the way down. What's even more interesting is there's another mutation in the very same gene that turns the dial up and produces what's called erythromyalgia which is known as man on fire syndrome where people have a constant feeling of burning pain even though there's no actual injury. That sounds equally horrendous. It is. But the good thing about this research is that it gives us targets for drugs which might in the future help treat chronic pain. Okay well in the name of scientific research I think it's about time you went back to the pain lab. Fine bring it on the last tool in Irene's pain kit turned out to be a laser. A pain laser. Right so this is much less heath Robinson now. This is some proper equipment. There are goggles. Yep you're going to have to wear goggles. So what we have here is a laser without touching the skin it will just penetrate just below that first layer of skin into what we call the epidermal layer and that's where all the pain fibers those fast and slow fibers end. So we're going to start quite gentle and just see if you sort of feel that. Oh now it's a different sensation isn't it because it starts as an initial prick. Yep and then it feels like heat afterwards. Yep that's right so the sort of afterburns you get that fast aid delta and then the sort of slower throbbing see if I take this a little closer. Yeah. Ow! Okay I didn't like it. Yeah you might find it's just going to rub that for a minute. Okay I'm going to turn this off. Yeah that was that was a seven and a half or eight. You heard that. It's a very powerful little device. Irene you've subjected me to your torture repertoire. Thank you. So how do you rate my pain threshold? Well we've pretty much given you every type of pain experience that we can possibly give and you've been pretty impressive. All of them you've taken us to fairly much the high end of where we would normally be for most subjects so well done you. But ready for listeners this is my smug face that I'm doing right now. So Dr. Heather when it comes to pain thresholds can we say queson? Well Dr. Fry we have two types of pain fiber one delivers fast sharp pain and the other is slow and throbbing. How these signals are carried and amplifying dictates your pain threshold. But this changes all the time depending on everything from your mood to how distracted you feel. Now Adam it's time to try the pain of childbirth. Got it Dash bye! All right so the stuff we didn't hear the other forms of pain that didn't make into the final edit I that was electrocuted a lot and I reenacted these massive pricks on my arm which was just again they didn't actually affect me at all. With needles with needles. All in a normal afternoon. Yeah so I was lasered electrocuted, stabbed, pricked and had chilly rubbed on my arm and the fact of the matter is it was all fine. Was it actually all fine? It was fine where were you? Actually on holiday. Actually on a beach somewhere in India. Drinking you know, you know, mehito. Fine. My feet up. Well that was also fine. It was fine. That was absolutely fine. Yeah it's fine. It's fine. Oh it's fine. Anyway you've got a high pain threshold. Yeah well apparently so and I'm not being I'm not being matcho here. I'm not being like super tough but the truth is that one of the tests which is being electrocuted on on my forearm they went through the whole dial one way through and I could only feel it after they got halfway up and after that it was just I knew that they were doing it. So they went up another notch a bit like the beginning of Back to Future. It turns the amp up to 11. Yeah or like in that famous milkroom experiment. Yeah no and they started doing that and zapping me and there's like eventually I was just sort of feeling it and Michelle at one point asked me look are you going to make a noise because this hurts and I thought you're crazy. And it's radio. I need to do that. My face isn't going to work here and they that me once more and the first words that came out of my mouth unprompted were oh I like that. Well I think we've just given you a new hobby. I don't know. We learn things about ourselves and you're subjected to scientific experiments. So I was electrocuted. There was the chili which we talked about that started to hurt after about half an hour and it was like being sunburned so it was a bit hurting. There were these special prickers they sort of drop with the heavy weight or changing weights depending on that. A needle in this tube. And then she lated me on the leg that did hurt. And then I was burnt. There was a sort of temperature probe that they put on my skin and Michelle informed me afterwards that I didn't dislike it enough that she would include it in the program. So yeah it does. I'm fine colors as well. I paid out very impressed. I'm quite a high. Yeah to be super human. All right let's not go over the top. I'm not saying that. You're saying that. I can't comment. But listen we've got a special interview because we were interested in the sort of history of pain and given the subjectivity and given the sort of social context of what pain we feel. We thought it would be interesting to look at how it's changed over time. So I spoke to Rob Bodis who is a history of pain researcher. Amazing. I know. It's McGill University in Canada and Fry University in Berlin. Fry. Spelt the same. No. See what I did there. And I asked him how would my high pain threshold be perceived in the past? Okay so question about pain thresholds because I was tested in the in the pain lab and when it turned out a bit of a surprise to me that I have a pretty high pain threshold which was very annoying to Hannah of course and I'm definitely gloting about that. But from a historical point of view how does well where does that put me in sort of social strata for being resilience to pain? Well from an historical point of view it might make you a criminal. It might make you some kind of animalistic type. It might make you a class or racial inferior. Hold on a sec. Well a criminal, an inferior animalistic criminal. I mean these are the sort of categories that have been applied to people with a great resistance to pain stimulus. All right so Rob you've just accused me of being a criminal. What is the root of that accusation based on my own pain threshold? Well in the 19th century there was an Italian criminologist called<|it|> criminal men which in Lombardos' work were sort of class degenerates from his point of view. They tended to have a very high pain threshold or to be insensitive to pain altogether. And of course this fits in with a general notion that people's sensitivity to pain kind of orders them socially whether you're included as a fully functioning member of civil society or whether you should in fact be excluded as a kind of untrustworthy brute. I don't think I trust you. I think you are an untrustworthy brute. That's what all of this is telling me. The main conclusion I draw from this programme. An untrustworthy brute after all this time. That's what you come up with. Well so I mean the reverse question also applies. How if you have a lower pain threshold? How refined are you in civilised society? So well that's the next question I asked Rob. Yeah I mean that's typically gone along with you know gendered ideas about pain sensitivity. So for example in the 18th and 19th centuries it was typically assumed that European women were extremely sensitive to pain just as they were likely to succumb to their emotions and the whole idea of hysteria and women's swooning and having a tax of the vapors and so on is connected to this idea that they are in fact more sensitive to pain. And whilst this disqualified them from having any public voice it was a marketer of their extreme refinement and civility. Extreme refinement and civility there. So the words that I associate with you and I was. And I associate with myself. So I think given that I've been subjected to all of these pain tests and and passed with such flying colours that I've been branded a criminal. What was it? A brutish criminality. So I think given that you are the refined. I think I can see what this is going to be. You can't you. I think it's only fair that at this stage in the proceedings we extend the pain hand and experiments to you to see just how refined and how all how brutish you are. Are you doing this on my own? No I will do it with you. We're going to have a pain off. We're going to have a pain off. So one of the experiments standard scientific tests. Michelle, come bring the pain. I'm quite competitive. Right. So I think that I can. What is what I'm beckoning in Michelle? So she's she's Michelle. Hello. Hi. I'm bringing the pain. Pain apparently looks like a black bucket. Right. So here we have it is a standard pain test. Science test. Thank you Michelle. I'll glamorous. This is I mean you know this is all just revenge for making around 100 metres because of my hercy ankle. For my hercy back. How is your back? It's much better. How's your hercy ankle? It's a little bit better. Thanks for asking. Good. But now we have to do this. Yes. So what this is is a bucket of ice water. That's pretty much it. Do we just put our hands in? We've got one in and we need to both stand up and we have to plunge our fists so they're touching the bottom of the bucket into the ice water and then Michelle starts timing. I've got new shoes on today but quite hurting. So I might put them back on. Does it just distract me? Well that is cheating. But Michelle are you ready? Yes I am ready. Okay well you start the time when we plunge. Could you give us the green light when we're ready to go? We're doing this properly scientifically and we're just going to chat. What to see how long it lasts? The green light is ready. Ready? Okay. Do we have to say don't do this at home? Probably. All right ready? Yeah. Okay let's go. This is quite cold. Yes. Okay. So the things we can chat about at this point is it quite cold. That's really cold. I'm already quite cold. I know it's a little bit cold and it's really hot day out. Is it working already? Yeah it is a bit. Yeah so one of the things we talked about with Irene is the question about whether ginger-haired people have higher pain thresholds than normal humans. I have read that when ginger people have operations they require more and more pain afterwards to sort of knock them out. This is quite cold. You know I thought I was going to be alright but it's actually really cold. I'm going to have to withdraw here. No you can't. Oh my god. He's kind of ready. He's joking. We did like 40 seconds. I mean it does actually really hurt. Oh I lost it. I didn't know where to keep going. I'll just leave it. I can't believe it. I cannot believe it. How they're just completely nailed that. That hurts a lot more than you expect. Yeah really did. Oh hurty hands. Did you really have to put that? That was more painful than any single one of the tests I did in Oxford. But it's a different type of pain right? Well it's like total hand coldness pain. That's the technical term. Which pain five is that one? That's the total hand coldness fiber. That was really how long was that Michelle? 40 seconds. 40 seconds. That's pathetic. I really enjoyed being electrocuted but that was not fun at all. I could have done a lot longer I think. I mean it was definitely hurting but the thrill of beating you was driving me forward. Well Hannah I have to concede defeat. You won the ice pain challenge by several seconds clearly. So Laurie is mine. Which means your pain threshold is higher than me which also means that out of the two of us I am more refined and you are more brutish. Well you know what elegance was never my forte anyway so I'm fine with that. The question came from Claire Jenkins in Wales. Claire's question was longer than the broadcast version which is why we bring the curious extra content. She also asked whether pain thresholds were different between men and women you being a woman. Apparently. And whether it was different in people with red hair you being a red headed woman. The Jean-Jageene. Jean-Jageene. And also Claire asked if I a man without the necessary equipment could experience the pain of child birth. So these are questions I put to Irene Tracy. The question that came in from Claire Jenkins was very specific about subjecting me specifically to the pain of child birth. Well that would be tough. Obviously experimentally we are limited rightly so by how much pain I can give you so I certainly don't have any kit or equipment having had three babies myself and child birth pain. There's nothing I've got in my repertoire that would get close to child birth pain. Well I'm fractionally grateful for that. So you're an introduction to the word ethics into this conversation. Supposedly some men say that passing a kidney stone is the most excruciating thing they've had and would be as far as they could imagine a kin to child birth. Because how do you ever know? You never know somebody else's pain. It's their pain. So past the question was about gender and whether there's a difference between how men and women perceive pain. The literature is really actually mixed on this one. So there's sort of women are more sensitive or men are more sensitive and that goes with the man-flu thing. I mean to be honest there's data to support both and it's mixed whether it's acute pain or chronic pain. Certainly what we do know is that the hormonal influence on women is dramatically important in terms of how that does change the processing of the signals and we've done a bit of work on that and that's something that's new. And so again the sort of new frontier is a better understanding more generally actually how hormones and changes in hormones influence brain processing and particularly pain. But I think at this point we're just not clear whether there are these big gender differences but certainly hormones have a role to plan. Of course in the chronic pain context it is interesting to note that it is predominantly more in women than it is in men. So again I think the journey that we're on scientifically is to better understand why is that? Is there something about again you know that the fact that we have these hormonal changes and swings that again influence the physiology that predisposes a little bit more to chronic pain. But the you know the studies that have done acute pain like this and burning you, burning means saying is there a gender difference? They're fraught with flaws and complexities that means you've got some day to say one thing, some say any other. Now I have heard that some redheads might have a higher pain threshold any truth to that? There's some evidence for that but then there's also some evidence that they have a lower and then it depends on what type of pain that they're experiencing as well. So again a bit like the sort of gender thing the jury is still out as to whether there's anything in this. There's been studies done both in animals and in humans that would relate to the particular gene that confers having red hair in your eye colour and skin colour which is a mutation that somehow this also changes the sensitivity to pain and so there's all these anecdotal reports. There's a little bit of scientific evidence but again there's data on both sides. So I think although it's an interesting observation and there's probably something in it because generally when people observe things enough there's probably something to be found we don't understand yet and it's not clear which way around it goes. I do just find it like extraordinary to imagine that people's experience of pain can be so wildly different. I remember talking to a friend of mine and just after she had her baby and she had no pain relief whatever whatsoever doing it and she was sort of like I'm not sure if I had any contractions you know it was just you know the baby came out, I was a bit uncomfortable but you know whatever and during that conversation I was just like how is this video? It was like an earthquake in my soul like how would you how would you not how would you not know there is no way you would not know. Yeah well it changes over time as well so mine I'm one of five second oldest and she describes my youngest brother as basically falling out. I'm not even she knew she was pregnant until he was born at term so you know there are so many factors I guess it's the fear as well you know if it's your if you're your first child that's sort of not knowing what's gonna happen if things don't matter. It's merely I mean all of the things that we spoke about in the program really can change the level of pain that you feel. Yeah I guess so and and I guess one of the key things is that I'm very grateful that I don't I will never have to experience what you've been through. Anyway it's time now for Curio of the Week. For the 75's Curio of the Week. There's Oliver Law his version of the Curio of the Week jingle. Thank you Oliver. So well okay a couple of episodes ago I mentioned about how I had some absolutely beautiful Curio of the Week badges made off my own bat got told off saying of my own back. I won't be doing that again and they were Gazomp which I would say by the triumphant Melissa Wagner Umali from Bradford in Massachusetts who came up with something far better way better. Can open worms everywhere because David Brownless from Reading he wrote and said at the end of the last series there was some talk of actual Curio of the Week badges being made and now I've probably left this a bit too late. Yes you have frankly David. But I'd like to submit my design for said badge anyway the question I mean this is a case of say what you see if you can imagine a question mark and a moustache combined together you've essentially imagined David Brownless's Curio of the Week badge. Have you know I'm quite into fonts? I am. Yeah. What kind of fonts do you like? It's not so much a font but it's you don't even call them font though do you if you're like proper type of yeah yeah it's not that anyway have you come across a punctuation mark called an terrabang? No I'm not sure I it's real I want to know it's real is it an interabang is a combination of a question mark and an exclamation mark which indicates shocked surprise yeah yeah aha an interabang interabang have you ever used one? No does everyone I mean who uses interabang? Yeah I don't know anyway the point what I just like an interabang and I think David Brownless is yeah curative this is much better than an interabang. What does he call it the question tash? Yeah. So I don't know what we're going to do I think we'll have to get all the badges made have a pile and then pick them at random buyer the blobs on a lava lamp if you listen to our last episode that is one way of doing it I'm gonna I'm gonna give this task over to Michelle Michelle in order to maybe we will work out what we're gonna do by the next year as well have some kind of solution. Well we've now got we've now got three we got we got a short list of three one by you which is all right we got one by and it wasn't even by you it was by your mate who's actually a designer one by David Brownless from Reading the now named the question tash and then the Melissa Wagner and Mally from Bradford Massachusetts thank you to everyone and David is our Curia of the week. Absolutely right you'll be getting a badge in the post possibly you won't until our next series though which I think starts in November November Michelle. Possibly. An on-committal possibly yes. Well it's our favourite bit of anything we ever get to do for Curious cases it's the bit where we have to ask you to rate us on the pot apps that's my favourite do you love doing this Adam's much favourite bit. We really love this. We love it. Whatever whatever software you use to download this waffle there's scientific goffery. We love your reviews and they do help people to discover us so you might be checking out another science podcast and thinking this isn't quite right. What is it that I'm missing something that lasts about between 30 and 40 minutes that features a mathematician and a whatever it is that I do. See the problem is right I kind of wish we didn't have to ask people to rate us but the thing is is that actually it does make a big difference. Please do rate us if you can be bothered but only if you give us five stars because yeah we don't want it if you give us four. If you don't like it five stars go away. And of course we entirely rely upon your questions so send us your questions to Curious cases at bbc.co.uk but also we want to say thank you for helping us with our ice bucket paint challenge and also making us some brownies. That was Curious Samantha Smith also a huge thanks to our production coordinator Maria Simons. Also to our studio managers so they're the people who sit behind the glass and listen to us absolutely waffle on about not you you wouldn't the raw recordings of these podcasts if you think this is awful. Sometimes we just stay overnight sometimes Michelle just just beds down these are actually the best bits. It's the best bits imagine what the unedited version is like one day will release it except there isn't a there isn't enough memory in the world to actually launch it. Anyway our studio managers so today it was Bob Nettles Nigel Dix for random and a bunch of other people who are superhuman make what we do sound better. And also finally thanks to Michelle Martin who is one of the greatest humans alive we will see you next series. Bye! Bye! Bye! That was Michelle. This is the BBC. Hello I'm Antonio Quirk and I'm the presenter of the film program on Radio 4. I'm Caitlin Benedict and I'm Antonio's lovable idiot sidekick. I'm on Radio 4 every Thursday afternoon talking to the most interesting people working in and around film. And then afterwards there's always something exclusive to the podcast anything from the work of Derek Jarman to the overwhelming cultural importance of Mama Mia and its sequels. Take a listen on Radio 4 on the BBC Radio website and all year round as a podcast.
