Hello the Curios! Welcome to another episode! Are you slowing down your wife's bed? I'm actually not, you're just experiencing my voice much slower. Well are we, Adam and Motherfurs? Isn't that a question? That is exactly the question! Tell you what, why do we spend this episode investigating exactly that? Music Radio Podcasts Well here we are at the beginning of another year, which is a relief because 2020 felt like it dragged on forever. Didn't it, Justin? We're pretty confident that 2021 is going to be event free with nothing worth reporting on at all. You haven't been watching the news, have you? Not really. Okay, well anyway, Joe, who's age 14, has a question related to exactly that idea because he asked us, do individuals perceive time differently? And if so, why? Well that's a great question, Joe. We do know that actual time doesn't change. Do we know that Adam? Do we? I have you not heard of Einstein and his thought experiments about being out in space and travelling at close to the speed of light. Right, thank you Dr. Fright, not incredibly helpful at this point. How about I modify it to say, we know that time itself does not detectably change unless you have an atomic clock or a travelling at the speed of light as almost no humans do like ever. Thank you, that's a much better definition, I mean. Okay, thank you. But I do think that Joe is onto something here because our perception of time is pretty flexible and it's something that we've all probably noticed at some point or other. I feel that the days are rushing by, mainly it's flesh's pulse. I suddenly think, today's Thursday, you know, God, I haven't done anything at all that I'm in to do since last Friday. And let it go so quickly that the whole week disappears. I probably need to come and watch in a minute and go, oh my goodness, I said I was going to be home hours ago. Is it half an hour yet? It's ten minutes. And you've got to not bump your brother. When I was in year six, I remember a week called take eight years and I'm wishing it over. And nowadays it would be like week and it was gone. Well we are all getting older. Well that's a true thought. Yeah, some more visibly than others. A steady on there. Yeah, you know though, there is actually a nice maths idea around why our perception of time changes as we get older. I did wonder when you would attempt to master fire this very obviously biological question. And the answer is now. But you know what, I'm calling in the big guns because I've got the help of fellow mathematician Professor Marcus D'Soultoy to explain. And the idea here, roughly, is that it's all down to something called the proportional theory. I certainly think of time as a line. A day in your life when you're first born is the hundred percent of your life. But when you move into the second day, of course that's gone down to fifty percent of your life. And as you get older and older, a day therefore represents a smaller and smaller fraction of your lifetime. And of course, a day therefore does in a sense change because of its relationship to the total amount of days that you've been alive. Ha. That is an interesting idea. I'm not entirely sure that I buy into it though. Yeah. I mean, you're not supposed to get completely literally. But this idea that humans experience the world as a fraction of what has gone before, actually you do find this in lots of different places. And a really good example, an application of this can be found in chocolate bars. Go on. The idea that if you change the size of something, it matters. The fraction that you change it by rather than the amount. So, okay, I don't know if you've ever looked at a wagon wheel and been like, I am sure that this used to be a lot bigger when I was younger. Definitely, absolutely. But I just assumed that that was because I was a lot smaller when I was younger. I mean, that's true. That's also probably true. But there are equations that tell you the fixed fraction by which you can reduce something by without anybody noticing. It's called the just noticeable difference. And it's all part of this idea that we experience the world logarithmically. We experience the world as fractions of what's gone before. And for me, by now, a week is actually a really small fraction of my life. And you spent the last week with me, which means that it's just whizzed by having lots of fun? Yeah. I'm not sure that that's the point that I was making just there. No, well, again, I mean, I think it's a nice idea. When you say that people experience the world logarithmically, I think what you meant there was that you and possibly Marcus De Sotoi, another mathematician, experience the world logarithmically, whereas normal people? No. No. All of us do. That's the point. Yes. Well, calm down, data, because I think that brains are a little bit more complicated than that. And psychologists, Claudia Hammond, agrees with me. She's a professor of public understanding of psychology at the University of Sussex. And she also presents all in the mind on Radio 4. She wrote a book called Time Warped, which was all about the psychology of time perception. And she, like me, is not really into the whole proportional theory at all. It's a brilliant description of what it feels like, but it's not an explanation of what happens, I think. So if that held, then a single day at the age of 40 would feel as though it completely flashed by because it would be one-fourteenth thousandth of your life. But, it doesn't completely flash by when you do psychological studies and talk to people about their perception of the days passing, the actual day themselves still goes at the same speed at different ages, even when people are much older. The day can seem to go at the same speed, so the days don't whizz by, the weeks and the months and the years are what whizz by. In a way, it's the markers of time that whizz by. And I think we need to be pleased about this because if it did hold, if for you imagine you were going to live till 80, then you would have lived half of your subjective life by the age of 20, which would seem like a real shame because... I don't know, my 20s were, they were pretty good. It seems to be all downhill from the 30s onwards. No, that's not true, but what does happen as you get older is there is more routine, particularly if people have kids, because obviously routine is good for kids. And so it does make it harder to distinguish between the different days and of what's going on. One of the reasons for it is called the Reminiscence Bump in Psychology. And that is that we remember much more between the ages of 15 and 25, because there's a lot of firsts within that time. You might have your first trip away without your parents, you live away from home, you try out all sorts of different things. There are lots of firsts in that time. It's very, very memorable. And we all have more memories from that time, and it's a time when we're sort of searching for identity as well. And so because we judge time by the amount of new memories that are made, it may be that the time then feels longer, and that the time later on feels quicker, because we make fewer memories. But also it's to do with this mismatch between what we see when we look at time prospectively and retrospectively, whether we're looking at how it's going now and looking back. And so prospective time estimation would tell us that the hours in middle age are still passing at the average speed, but it's the months and the years that are shocking. And it's partly because there are fewer new events. There are fewer markers in time. Now I think we're all familiar with this, this idea that so many of the significant memories that we've formed in our past actually happened between the ages of about, I don't know, 15 and 25. It's a important time. It is. I'm really super cautious of being that guy who only talks about music from 20 years ago, because that was the last time he bought an album. You're not that cautious about it, are you? Oh, I'm happy with all the time. What about the, sometimes these things, 12 around on social media like, if, you know, back to the future, the film, Martin McFly gets sent back accidentally 30 years into his past and he meets his own parents. Well, that was made in 1985 and he gets sent back to 1955, right? It's a great film. Everyone's wearing T-dresses, it's lovely. Yeah. If they made that film now, the year we'd get sent back to would be 1991. Isn't that depressing? That's terrifying. Yeah, I'll be doing my A levels again. Oh, we're doing, we're very old. Yeah. You know, I had something similar actually. I was last year, I was talking to some undergraduates at UCL and we were discussing, you know, big world changing events and the topic of the attack on the World Trade Center came up in conversation and they explained to me how their parents had told them about it about how they read about it in textbooks and it was only then that I realised people who weren't born at 9.11 are going to be in their 20s this year. Right, we're so old. I don't think it should be allowed. I think young people are much younger than they used to be. Definitely are. Definitely are. You know, it is interesting what Claudia says there about routine. And my question is, what about the last year? I mean, our routines have really changed. We've been, spent many months in lockdown. How does that change our time perception? My routine for the last year has been get up, cry a little bit, eat a lot, look wistfully out of the window. Eat a lot, so I know. I've never realised how much humans need to eat children. I mean, they're just every day. Non-stop. And they still want more the next day. Claudia did have some interesting non-trivial things to say about time-ception during lockdown because it's been really interestingly different for different people. Josh, it's felt a long year, hasn't it? Although in one way it's a long year and then in the other hand, if you think, oh, well, the beginning of October doesn't seem that long ago, because if you look back on the last few weeks, you probably haven't done that many different things, so you haven't made that many new memories. And so in one way, it collapses in on itself. But there was some interesting research done on this. So during the first lockdown, they asked people how fast that particular day had gone. 40% of people said it went slower than normal. And 41% said it went faster than normal. So people were divided over that, and they also asked them the same for how did that week go. And again, people were divided over whether they thought it went slower or faster. Now, of course, people are having lots of different experiences during this time, and so we can't assume everyone isn't busy. Lots of people are very busy, and particularly were then when they were trying to make the tech work to work from home and maybe homeschool kids, or maybe, you know, work-key workers working harder than ever to try and make everything happen. So I think there's all sorts of different experiences that have gone on. But I think this year has done very strange things to our time-ception. And we'll always remember that it was 2020, and one way some things will be very much time stamped, if you like, will know they were this year. But it might be very hard to work out when they were in this year, because it won't be before or after you went the holiday, because you didn't go. It won't be before or after you went to that wedding, or that party, or all those other things we haven't been to this year. That does make a lot of sense there that time change is depending on what you're doing. If you're doing something really boring, or you're doing routine things, then time can seem to drag. Yeah, I completely agree with that. That, you know, today to day, especially during lockdown when the schools are closed, are interminable and never end. And yet, at the same time, we sort of lament the fact that their childhoods just whizzed past without us even noticing. There's another really good example of this, which Claudia Hammond describes. Do you remember the concept of a holiday? Long in the past. Yes. But people used to do it. I don't know, a couple of years ago, I think. I forget. Anyway, we hugely time warp holidays when we think about them in our memories. So one of the big factors that affects how we perceive time is how many new memories we're making. And one of the big ways that we judge how much time has just passed is by how many new memories we made during that time. So if you're not making new memories, if all the days merge slightly into one, then it can make it harder to make a judgment about what's happened. And that's when a really weird thing comes when we go on holiday that I call the holiday paradox, which is that if it's a fun holiday, packed with good, fun, exciting new things, at the time it seems to go really fast, say you're away for a week, in no time at all, it's halfway through, and you're already thinking about your journey home again and what you've got to do before that. But when you get home, you look back, and it feels as if it was ages, and there's this kind of mismatch, and it's all to do with sometimes we look at time prospectively. So we ask how fast is it going right now? Am I having fun on my board? And then we look at it retrospectively. We say how much time passed, how much has gone by? And we judge that by how many new memories we made. So when you go on holiday, everything's new and exciting and different. And so you can remember loads and loads of different things compared with the average week, where if a week is routine, you can't remember that many different things. And so you look back, you think you've made loads of memories, and it feels as if that holiday was long, and as if you've been away for ages, and as if you've been away from work for ages, even though it might only have been a week. I could really do with a holiday. I don't really care if it races by. Well, okay, don't get too excited. Because it turns out that your emotional state actually plays quite a big role in how we perceive time. I don't know if you've ever noticed that people report when they are, say, involved in an accident, or maybe some really scary event, that time seems to slow down. So maybe somebody breaks into your house, you're in a heightened emotional state, and suddenly you just have a lot more time to think about what to do. Yeah, I've got a really trivial, but quite depressing version of this, which is that I play cricket, I'm a wicket keeper, and when you keep wicket, one of the things that you need to do is catch the ball after a batsman has nicked it. And it happens very quick, but at that moment, between the nick and it landing in my gloves for a wicket, I get so excited and time slows down so much that I've often been described as celebrating before the ball has hit my gloves, and it last season I dropped three. Fat, I'll be honest with you Adam, that sounds less like a story about time-ception, and more a story about you making excuses for why you're about cricket. That is also correct. Okay, you know this idea, though, of time slowing down, it's got a name, it's called Time Dilation, and there are two hypotheses as to why it happens. So one is that, okay, maybe it's just about the retrospective recollection of a very scary event that makes it seem like it took a lot longer than it did. And the other possibility is that maybe people actually have increased time resolution during that moment. Maybe we're sort of capturing more images as it were, and so it's like we see it in slow motion. I like both of those hypotheses. I mean, they seem like very testable things, but I can't work out how you would actually test either of them. Well, there's actually a simple way that you can test them. It's quite a famous experiment. All it involves is taking your students and just tracking them off a building. It does, and he can't. Does that get past the ethics guarantee? No, it literally does. So this is an experiment that was conducted by David Eagerman. He's from Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. And a few years ago, he got us a bunch of volunteers, his students, I should say, and he took them to go and do something called scada diving, which is suspended cash air device. So what you do is you climb up to the top of a tower that's 150 feet high, and then so much as pushes you off. No, no, no really. Okay, so at the bottom there's giant necks. Roaps? No ropes, no bungee's nothing. You are in genuine freefall for three seconds. How is this legal? What, okay, so actually people do this for fun. Okay, I have a video over here on the screen. So what you can see is that my graduate student, Chess Stetson and I are ascending this tower in Dallas, and the tower is 150 feet high. So as you can see, we're going very high up in the air. I don't think it's very amusing. I think it's amazing at all. So he did this as part of an experiment. Yeah, because he noticed that the people who actively agree to do this experience, they all reported that they felt as though that drop lasted much longer than three seconds they were in the air. And so he realized this is a perfect opportunity to test those competing hypothesis. So the way they did it is they created this special watch. The device, which is called the perceptual chronometer, and what I'm doing right now is setting the rate of presentation to a speed faster than Chess's brain would ever normally be able to read it. Just a screen with a series of pixels on it. And on that screen, they would flash up a number, like the number four, for example, in red on a black background. And then very quickly, they would flip to the opposite image. So the same number in the same place, but now it's black with a red background. Now, if you flick between those two images, the number and the inverse, very, very quickly, the eye can't tell the difference. The eye just looks at it as though it's one big blob of red. Because we've got a natural frame rate. Right. Exactly. Your eyes have a natural frame rate. You find that frame rate on the ground in your participants, and then you set it so it's just a tiny bit faster. So that on the ground, people can't tell what the number is there being shown. Then you take them up to the top of the tower, and push them off, and push them off, and ask them to look at the watch on the way down. Wow. OK, we're doing here, setting it. So here you can see Chess. He's now being hovered over the net. And now he's released and is falling. And then he hits the net below. And because you were at that threshold of what you can see and what you can't see on this watch, they could prove that people were processing no more visual information in freeform than they were in a perfectly calm environment. Oh, it's C-so. As they're falling down, they still couldn't see the actual numbers. They still couldn't see the numbers. They call this tacky psych here. And ultimately, it pulls apart those two different hypotheses. It demonstrates that time doesn't actually sew down. Your brain cannot process more actual information. What changes is our perception of time after the event has passed. This is what David Eugman says about it. Wow. There's something strange going on here, because people aren't actually seeing in slow motion. And yet they believe the event lasted much longer. Well, turn it that was a very neat result, because that opened up a whole line of research in my lab for the last two years, where we've come to understand that duration. How long you think something lasted is completely separable from what you think happened during the event. So for example, if there's somebody's voice during a scary event that you think took much longer, it's not as though the voice slows down. So in movies during the scary event, the person says, mwah, like that. But it turns out that it doesn't happen in real life. You don't have distortions of time the way you would if your perception were just a movie camera that you're stretching out. We simply think that it took a really long time. What we found out is the more energy the brain spends on representing an event, the longer it seems to have lasted. When you're in fear for your life, another part of your brain called the amygdala, which kicks into gear. And this is essentially your emergency control center. It lays down memories on essentially a secondary memory track that is completely separate from normal memories. So fear-based memories have a different architecture to them. Well, it turns out that when you lay down this extra layer of memories, when you read the whole event back out, it seems to have taken a very long time because you have so much more memory than you normally would. Your brain's interpretation is, oh well, that must have taken a long time. Today we are talking time-bending, warping, stretching, and why time flies like an arrow when you're having fun. And why fruit flies like a banana? That is the only known joke about fruit flies and I am sorry about it. And I am choosing to ignore you. OK, so we have talked about the different situations that we encounter that can twist and bend times. Such as being thrown off a building by your professor. Yes, such as that. But generally any scary or emotional event, or even novel experiences like when we're on holiday. Right, but Joe's question to us was, whether different individuals experience time differently. Now, in fact, there are various conditions that affect our sense of time. His psychologist Claudia Hammond. If people are feeling depressed, then time tends to go more slowly. If you do experiments where you make people feel rejected, you get in a room and you pretend they're going to partner up with somebody else for the next part of the study, you get them all to chat to each other all these people and then write down on a list who they like. And then they call people into a room and this is such a mean experiment. They call people into a room one at a time. And then say to them, I'm really sorry, this has never happened before, but nobody wants to be with you. So we think it's better if you go and work in this room on your own. And then they tell the other half of the people that, in fact, this has never happened before, but everybody would put them down. Everybody wants to work with them. They must be so popular. So it's only fair if they work on their own because otherwise people will be upset. So they also end up, all of these people end up rooms on their own, half of them wondering why people who just met them seem to hate them and half of them feeling delighted because they're suddenly so popular. And then the tests they get to do, absolutely straightforward, test of time estimation and time goes more slowly for the people who are feeling rejected. So you can even induce it temporarily, really, really easily. You can make time go more slowly for people. So yeah, people with depression, time goes more slowly. People with psychosis, it's interesting. Time will do all sorts of weird things and people will often describe that they almost have no perception of time. They can't tell what's now and what's the past and what's the future. And it's almost as if it can be in any sort of order at all. There are some benefits as well. But it's really interesting that children with Tourette's syndrome and in particular, children who are really good at having learnt to control their tics. Those children are actually better than other children at judging durations of just over a second. And this is thought to be because in order to suppress the tics, the prefrontal cortex, so the front of the brain has to become more active and that this is thought to be the area where those durations just over a second are estimated where that's done. And so those children actually become better at time estimation for that. Children with dyslexia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder are also thoughts to have deficits in time perception. Katia Rubia is a professor of cognitive neuroscience at King's College London and the expert on time perception in children with ADHD. ADHD stands for attention deficit type hyperactivity disorder and it consists of a triad of problems which are hyperactivity in attention and impassiveness. So hyperactivity means not being able to sit still, excessive physical movement, constantly fidgeting and not finishing things too much talking, that kind of thing. Inattention means having problems to concentrate on tasks being easily distracted, not listening when being talked to and being forgetful and disorganized. Non-passiveness is the third and the most important feature of ADHD and impassiveness in particular in my view is associated with timing problems because if you think of definitions of impassiveness you will see acting on the spur of the moment without thinking and not using reflection time, not thinking of the future or doing things prematurely. Being easily bored for example means that the passage of time is more insufferable for you, that's why you can't wait. Suggest that ADHD and impassiveness is related to problems with time perception where time is subjectively too long or problems with forward thinking. And Katya and her team have conducted an experiment to see how time drags for children with ADHD. We did a series of timing tasks. We looked at time perception where you have to estimate a time interval and what we find in time perception, ADHD children over estimate time, most of them. So time for them is subjectively elongated. If you are some two, estimate 10 minutes, then they say 15 minutes. We also find that problems with anticipating time and they have problems with forward thinking, which can be measured in task where you have to choose whether you want to smaller or would now a larger or would later. So typically ADHD children go for the smaller or would now because they don't think of the future because they have problems with this forward thinking, temporal bridging and I call it temporal myopia, temporal short sightedness. When you look at brain function and structure, you get even more evidence that ADHD is linked to problems in timing. The areas in the brain which are related to timing, I exactly the same regions which are also abnormal in ADHD. So the frontal lobes, the basal gagnavitch light deep in the brain and the cerebellum are the latest regions to develop in the brain and all these regions are very important for timing functions. And if you think about it, the younger the child, the more they live in the present moment and they have the ability to estimate time and the ability to forward plan or think ahead develops very late in life. And we found in FMI studies that exactly the same regions which are important for timing are under functioning. So they're reduced in activation and ADHD children compared to normal children. And we also find that it's a structural level. So in structural MI, the same regions which media timing functions are smaller in structure in ADHD and there is a delay and the moderation at the structural level and the function level in the same region. So the ADHD children behave like younger children that have worse timing skills and this is related to the delayed development in these very regions which are important for timing. And in fact, the correlation between seeing the structural and functional differences in these regions of the brain and children diagnosed by the established methods for ADHD was about 75%. Have you ever come across that very famous experiment about delayed gratification? Yes, this is the one that involves giving me sweets and then asking me to not eat the sweets, which is I think also ethically challenging. I think you're supposed to do this experiment on children. You know, I went, that's a psychologist. He did that on us a few times. I think I failed every time we were growing up. Okay, so this does the rounds quite often actually on social media, people do it with their kids with bits of chocolate. You sit a kid down, you say, here's a bit of chocolate. I'm going to leave the room. If you don't touch the chocolate, then by the time I come back I'll give you another piece of chocolate. I mean, is there a negotiation here? Could I have, if I wait a bit longer, could I have all the chocolate? There is no negotiation. But kids with ADHD, for them, the idea that they might have to wait a period of time, it just feels like it's far too long off in the future. So they don't tend to perform particularly well on this test. Yeah, I also didn't perform very well on that. Many times that's been tested on me. I do think that, I mean, that's a very simple one, but designing these experiments, it's quite a lot of variation in them. I mean, David Eagleman pushing students off a building, not exactly standard experimental procedure. Unconventional, unconventional, I'd say. Well, Claudia told me about some of the other experiments in this domain of time perception and some of the earliest ones, which were really boring. A bit harsh. I'll wait for it. There was some remarkably straightforward experiments. And one of my favorites, and this is partly because of their names, I must admit, was done in 1917, by a couple called Mr and Mrs. Boring. Just a good name. You've got to admit. Anyway, in their experiment, their experiment wasn't boring at all, because what they decided to do was to wake up people who were fast asleep in the middle of the night and ask them to guess what time it was. And they wanted to know whether people can monitor time, if you like, whether the clocks keep going in their brains while they're asleep. And they found that people could do it too often within about 15 minutes, if they were good at it, but that not everyone could do it. I don't know what we make of that, and whether that's useful, but it's there in the annals of science. Here's the question, though. What happens in our brains when we are trying to measure time rather than just sort of perceive it? Do we actually have an internal clock that exists in our brains? I mean, that would be a really good idea. It would really help us understand all these things. And we do have various measures of perceiving time in our brains, but Claudia Hammond explained that a single internal brain clock has never been demonstrated. Well, people have been searching for the internal clocks for decades, really, because nobody can find the ideal clock in our brain. There is the body clock, and that is controlling our sleep, wake cycle, and obviously is affected by sunlight and the light coming in. But that is not what is allowing us to be able to guess whether 30 seconds has gone by, or to know what 20 minutes feels like. And we do know what 20 minutes feels like. There is something about it that we understand. So they haven't found a single clock. What they have found is that different areas of the brain seem to be implicated in judging different durations of time. And you can find this from when people have had damage to a particular area of the brain. So for example, the cerebellum, which is low down at the back of the neck and makes up 10% of the brain's volume, seems to be the area where milliseconds are detected. And if that area is damaged, it is very difficult for people to do anything that needs millisecond precision. And even things like movement can be made more difficult if you've got damage in that area. Whereas for durations of just over a second, that seems to be the prefrontal cortex at the front of the brain. And that there is some work done as well on the anterior insular cortex. And this is an area where you might experience some sort of gut feelings like disgust or butterflies in the stomach or an awareness that you're detecting warmth, something like that. And that's maybe this area is somehow allowing these other perceptions of things to count time itself. So because nobody can find a particular clock, one of the theories is that pulses that are going on in our brains anyway are being used as the counter, if you like, that somehow we're counting those because there is nothing that's ticking away. So it could be that there's a whole series of clocks. It could be just counting other brain activity. Well, there are almost as many theories as there are minutes in the day. This one is from Time Researcher Neurologist Mark Whitman. So interesting when we talk about what's happening in the brain for shorter time durations in the milliseconds of seconds range, there's no consensus on where on the brain or how in the brain time is processed. If you would ask different neuroscientists, different scientists would agree on major aspects, on how the brain works. But not so with the experience of time, with brain scans, one can look at which brain areas are active when people perceive time. And these brain scans typically show that many different areas of the brain are activated. Just to name a few, Basil Ganglia, the right parietal cortex, the right prefrontal cortex, the cerebellum. So you name a region of the brain, and probably someone has made up a theory about time perception connected to that region. And another theory is linked to the fact that timing also registers in the insular cortex a part of the brain that's associated with emotions. One idea from the neuroscientist, Bud Craig, is that maybe what we're doing is counting emotional moments that we're almost asking, how am I feeling now, and how am I feeling now, and how am I feeling now, and that then we know some time has passed with those different feelings that we had, or with those similar feelings that we had. That's an incredibly sort of mystery, really. Sort of teenage way to look at things, how am I constantly asking yourself how you feel? What about this idea that we have evolved to be novelty detectors, and so we quite quickly forget uninteresting things, but when we see something new, we're like, oh, that's a new thing. Yeah, absolutely. If we see the same things again and again, we don't need to pay as much attention to them. We need to take some mental shortcuts because there's just too much to take in. So you stop keep noticing all the things in your living room that are always there, but you notice the man with a knife who's there, who isn't normally there instead. Which is a good thing that you notice. That's handy. Yeah, it is handy to notice that. So it's good we've evolved that way. David Eagerman has another theory as to what is going on, and this involves the effort it takes to make new memories. If you're doing something that's very routine and you've seen it before, your brain is just whispering along. It's burning almost no energy. It already knows exactly what to do, and it's writing down very few memories. In situations like that, time goes very quickly. In contrast, when you're doing something new, your brain is on fire with activity. It's trying to figure out the pattern. It's trying to see what's going on. Your brain is spending a lot of energy and laying down a lot of memories. And in these situations, things seem to take a very long time. So the strange hypothesis is that time subjective duration is a reflection of how much energy your brain is burning. In other words, the days of thinking of time is just a river flowing past, and we're just tracking it. Those days are over, because time is not something in the outside world, it's something that we're constructing with our brains. Okay, so we're piecing together the many complex parts that it's taking to understand Joe's question, why time warps in our heads? But it's very clear that experiments to do, this is not particularly easy. Yeah, we'll just hold that thought for a second, because I actually have one here for you right now, and it's really easy and it's really fun. So this was from a 2004 paper, and it's got the best title ever. The paper was called Time Subjective Expansion for an Expanding Oddball. Good time for a concept album, to go this. I know, even better than that, one of the researchers has the best name ever. He's called James and Trilligator. He was born to be a researcher in psychology. Absolutely, such a cool name. Anyway, the idea for the experiment is to try and work out whether people perceive different images at different rates. Are you going to do this on me? Do it on you now. Okay, go pass your my computer. So here's the experiment. I've got a set of slides, but I want you to press play. I've just damaged the studio. Okay, slide one, it is a black screen, and it says oddball test. Now, I want you to describe what you're seeing. It's going to happen pretty quickly, so you're going to have to be sharpish. Okay, here we go. Are you ready? Yeah. Go. Nothing's happening. Oh, giraffe. Oh, hello, giraffe. Okay, giraffe is flashing. It's the same picture. Oh, hello. Okay, hello, giraffe again. Giraffe. Cake, giraffe, giraffe. Oh, that's a cake. All the same picture of the giraffe. He's very friendly. He's just on an oh, different picture of a giraffe, a giraffe cake, and finish. I mean, there were lots of lovely giraffes. Okay, now I'm not sure this is an experimental setting that we're doing this test in, but now I want you to tell me which of those images the giraffe or the cake appeared on the screen for the longest amount of time. Okay, so the giraffe was flashing very quickly, like bam, bam, bam, bam, bam, bam, bam, bam, bam. And then the cake would come on and then it would sit on the screen for a bit longer, and then it would go back to the giraffe flashing on. Amazing, because every single image you just looked at was timed at exactly the same rate. The giraffes were on the same rate. They really were. No, it wasn't. It wasn't. Hang on, let me have a look. I genuinely want to do this again, okay? Giraffe, giraffe, giraffe, giraffe, giraffe. There's no way. There's no way. If you look in the settings, they're all set to turn away from exactly the same rate. And so this is an experiment which was very cleverly designed to demonstrate that novelty makes a really big difference in one's time perception. Can you see that you can see the timings and they are exactly the same, aren't they? I mean, I don't believe you. You're not very good for computers. See, did it. Okay. So gone. Really surprised. Are you really surprised? I'm really surprised. So. Okay, so in the settings, it says that it's one second per image. It just didn't feel like that at all. It absolutely was. Each image was flashing over at exactly the same rate. But you thought that the cake was on the screen for much longer than the flashing giraffes. Yeah. It felt like it just lingered in a good way because it's cake. Well, that's just it. So there's a couple of things happening here, which is that the first is that novelty appears to slow down time. So you saw a load of giraffes and giraffes are lovely. But you saw so many of them that your brain becomes used to them. And then when you see something completely new, you go, ooh, new thing feels like a lot longer. Which is what Claudia was saying earlier about routine and going holiday. Exactly. And then there's another aspect to this, which is that it's not just novelty that makes a difference. It's novelty of things that you really want. How delicious was that cake? I mean, I'm not going to lie. It looked very delicious. It's a big chocolate cake. And so there's an even... I do quite want a giraffe, though. You can't have a giraffe. You can have some cake afterwards if you're good. There's another stage to this as well. And they did the same experiment with students who hadn't eaten that morning. And they reported that the cake was on screen even longer than if they were full up, or if it wasn't a cake at all. Because they super wanted the cake. And then they did another stage of the experiment, which is to say to the students, you can have the cake at the end of the experiment, regardless of whether you pass it or not. And their perception of the amount of time that the cake was on screen was the most of all of these sets. Yeah, I think if someone came in with a trolley load of cake at the end of the experiment, I'd be pretty... You wanted to linger as much as possible. But it shows a number of things. It shows that our time perception is so heavily influenced by our psychology of not just novelty, but of stuff that we desire and stuff that we are subsequently promised, especially if it's cake and you're a student. But actually, they were on screen exactly the same amount of time. So, you know, really cool study. There are some more. And his Claudia with some other results in the same sort of domain. It is the case that some individuals are better at really simple time estimation tasks. So, where you tell somebody, we're starting the clock now, I want you to tell me when 30 seconds has gone. There is variation between people and people are better at it when they're younger. So, I do this with my students and they're all like 2021. And they have to guess when 30 seconds has passed. And it's amazing. They get things like, you know, 29.3 and 30.4 seconds. Whereas if you test people more my age, people will say things like 21, 22, or they'll get 38, 39. And you're not allowed to count. You've got to just guess. So, people are better at time estimation when they're younger, but there is a bit of individual variation as well. Some people are brilliant at it. And also, it depends on what duration you're looking at. So, musicians, for example, are really good at millisecond timing because they have practiced at that. And millisecond timing makes a massive difference if you're playing music. Yes, it does. And I suppose it really makes a massive difference in your perception of music as well. That it is those incredibly small, almost imperceptible, but not imperceptible differences between sticking to the beat and not sticking to the beat, which switches music from being bad to good to genius. Absolutely. What can really play with our expectations during music as well if people don't do exactly what you expect by the millisecond, that can be the most brilliant, amazing thing. But even these millisecond timings can make a difference to something as simple as speech. So, if you take the sounds, bar and par, you do the same thing with your mouth really to make both of those sounds. But just the timing is very, very slightly different. And because the timing is different, that makes the difference in the sound. And if you say bar and par and you put your hands, or you put your fingers on your voice box, you can actually feel the difference there in what you're saying. I can completely relate to that. There's a very famous misheard lyrics, which are just down to those tiny millisecond perceptual changes. I think the most famous one of these is in Purple Hayes by Jimmy Hendrix, where the lyric is. I just think of myself as a... I just think of myself as a... I just think about it. Oh, dear. Where the lyric is, excuse me, while I kiss the sky. Excuse me, while I kiss the sky. But it really sounds a lot like, excuse me, while I kiss this guy. That's not too difficult. Yeah, and it is just those milliseconds. So they really matter. Millie second timings really matter for us to understand what's happening and to understand speech in particular and music. So, Dr. Otheford, when it comes to the question of whether people perceive time differently, can we say, okay, so... Yes, Dr. Vry, we can. People certainly do perceive time differently. It can depend on your age. Or state of mind. Whether you are scared, excited, depressed, or sad. Or if you're musical. Or if you have a condition such as ADHD or dyslexia. And that testing time perception is relatively easy, but working out why people perceive time differently is a bit more tricky. Because time perception is processed in different parts of the brain related to memory, experience, and emotion. Wow, half hour just. Wisd by. Yeah, speak to yourself. That was super fun, really, really interesting. I like that topic a lot. Yeah, that double lock. You know, I particularly find that idea of sort of an internal clock in your mind, really intriguing. Because I don't know, I mean, we have to do it a bit sometimes, right? Like when we write trails for this show, we have to make sure they hit a certain amount of time. And you know, if you overdue live TV, you get the countdown in your ear, you've got to be out at the right time, so on. But there are some real professionals at this stuff. And I want to tell you a story about Angela Riffin. Yes, I'm already in the group. She is unbelievable. Unbelieveable. OK, so I was once doing this program. There was about inventions. It was a live TV program. And the idea it's few years ago now, but the idea was that different celebrities would come on and they'd say why they thought a particular invention was the best that Britain has ever created, then the public would vote blah, blah, blah. Anyway, as normally happens with live TV shows, you start off and you're doing really well for time. And then something goes wrong, and you have to sort of cut the second half of the program as you go. So all of the celebrities have been given two minutes to pitch their particular invention. But Angela Riffin, who was one of the last, she overheard a conversation between the director and the presenter, the other presenter. And her time was going to be cast to one minute, 45 seconds. And she was like, absolutely not. I am here to win. Yes, and she's a grand arm of TV. I wouldn't enter that contest. Yes, you are not casting my time, no way. So the presenter was a bit like, well, I don't know. I don't want to do it if we're... Anyway, they go out, they're on camera. And it gets to just over a minute of Angela's time. And the presenter tries to jump in with another question to begin to wrap things up. And Angela just does not give him any room whatsoever. She starts launching into an incredible monologue. Doesn't give me even room for a breath, right? And carries on going, talking about her invention. And finishes, I kid you not, on exactly, precisely, the stroke of two minutes, not one second more, not one second less. In her mind, she was counting up to exactly two minutes without any reference point whatsoever. I mean, that is astonishing. Total, pro. I hope you all applauded. Fair, just a storm. She won the night, so, you know, she won. Yeah, absolutely. I couldn't do that. That's why they don't let me do live radio, that and all the swearing. OK, so other things on the agenda, we spent a bit of time talking about how... I mean, this isn't really related to time perception. It's more just about the fact that we're old now. You're old. Well, yes, but the students that you have who weren't born when 9-11 happened, which is all undergraduates. So, yeah, 21. That I've done similar sorts of things. I've got a lecture about the history of genetic engineering, which involves talking about the history of music as an analogy. And in it, I refer to a little sample from a drum beat, taken from the B side of a seven-inch single from 1969. And I said this to some first-year undergraduates. And it was a seminar group. And one of them just went, what's a seven-inch? What? I don't know. I said, they didn't know what a small, fine record was. So I was like, I was standing there getting... So, you know, music, right? Well, it used to come on these flat black discs that were exactly seven-inch. You know, the final is quite popular again now, though. I mean, not seven-inch is on. You know, you're right. I always wanted to actually, when you get people who are sort of, let's say, under 25, and they're using a sort of word editor. And they press the little button in the top when they want to save their document. Do you reckon they're like, what is that? Like, what is a floppy disc? What is, I don't know what that symbol is. I don't even know what a disc is. I don't know, floppy one. What is that? Yes, in the olden days, we had to have these little things and they look exactly like the thing on your screen there. I think the conclusion for this is just never make any pop culture references ever at all. It's just embarrassing. Yeah, I agree. Should we do Cure of the Week? The Curious Cases in Box Cure's Cases at BBC.co.uk. On the 26th of December, we received an email, which was concerning one of the discussions we had about topology, I looked very confused. Human Donuts. Yes. Yes, it says, a tube has a hole at each end. I'm going to have seven holes. They say in outrage, what did I miss? Now, you can forget that. This is an interesting part of the sentence coming up. I play a flue call horn, so I am a tube expert. Now, if you're really interested in the seven-holt human, you can go back through our archive and find out what episode it's in. I can't remember by now. But the important thing about this story is this R. P. Jusser, Fiona Roberts. She replied... So the first thing is her email address is Flue call horn lady. We don't have a name yet at this point in the conversation. At this point, we certainly don't know. But R. P. Jusser, Fiona, she emailed Flue call horn lady and said, thank you for your email. Look, I'm going to help you. But only if you play a shawl flue call horn and turns out the flue call horn lady... Yeah. There's a bit rude to disagree with that way. I like it. It's like a super hero. It is flue call horn lady. Anyway, turns out she is actually called Heather Militzon. She is from France. Yes. So she's Heather now, the secret identity of flue call horn lady, wrote to us and said, avoi la, because she lives in France in the Alsace. Here is the brotherhood and fry theme tune in exchange for a Curie of the Week badge, played on the flue call horn. Definitely a worthy winner of a Curie of the Week badge. If you have an unusual instrument and like to, you know, just send in a little musical rendition of any of our musical items, then, you know, there's Curie of the Week badge. It's splendid. It's almost guaranteed the more obscure the instruments, the better. Yeah. So you can send in your Curie of the Week entries to Curie's Cases at BBC.co.uk and don't forget to send us in more questions of things that you are intrigued by. You do do the monologue at the end, don't you? I do every time. Is it because you don't trust me to be sensible? Because you always forget. And then I'm like, well, we're going to bloody wrap this up somehow. The end, people. Bye.
