I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. Science. I like it. MUSIC Welcome back. It is Series 7. Series 7 of the curious cases of Rutherford. Did you miss us? I missed us. I missed you, the listeners, the special pod listeners, the ones that secretly we love a little bit more, 22% more than the broadcasters. Yeah, absolutely right. Now in the last series, we were in the Women's Hour studio and we asked you to send us in some questions where we could get to eat some delicious food like the people who present the women's hour to eat. Shameless, wasn't it? Yeah. Shameless. Desire to actually just eat some food. It's true. And when we asked that question, we had in our minds this image of top chefs coming in with an array of beautiful, well-cooked food in front of us. We thought it was going to be something like that. Turns out, it wasn't. We do have a top chef and cookery writer. We did. Unfortunately, we had to do the cooking. We had to do the cooking. In fact, our normally congenial relationship, Michelle tried our producer, tried to drive a wedge between us and she made us compete. We have to make a cake each. And then it was judged. And here's what happened. Hello. It's a bit of an unusual case today, listeners, because we've come out of the studio and we're in the kitchen. Yes. Now, this question was sent to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk by Helena McGinty, who tells us she is 69 and a half and lives in Malaga in Spain. She asks, I have always used my mother's sponge cake recipe, but is there a noticeable difference in the outcome if you vary some of the ingredients or the method? Now, she goes on to list a few variations that she's tried over the years, butter versus margarine, brown sugar versus white sugar, hand-wisking versus an electric mixer. So today, we are conducting none other than the curious cake-or... Duh, duh, duh! Yes, we're going head to head, cake to cake. I'm going up against Dr. Fry to see who can concoct the perfect sponge. It's obviously going to be me. And to help us to oversee this experiment and to talk about the science of cake, joining us is material scientists, Professor Mark Madovnik. So Mark, tell us how are we going to proceed with this investigation? There's only one way to do it. That's to do some experiments, of course. And I'm going to need you both to bake different cakes with different methods and different ingredients. And see which ones better? Of course. MUSIC OK, Adam, I'm giving you this half of the kitchen. Yes, here is your recipe. Excellence, so three eggs, self-raising flour, white sugar, margarine. Margarine, why do I get margarine? Many people swear by margarine for baking. Really? They do. Surely all foods on earth taste better if they're made with butter. I'm telling you, margarine is really well worth a try. Fine, I feel like I'm being hamstrung before we've even begun this competition. Margarine is excellent for baking because of its consistency for absorbing during the mixing. So something that's very, very hard might not absorb too much air, or something very runny might not. So you're already in the middle. So if you use oil, it'd be too runny, and if you use butter, as Hannah is using, it might be too hard. Now, of course, temperature plays a role here. Yeah. This is probably about 22 degrees in here, 23 degrees. People recommend 18 degrees for mixing margarine and a cake. What? Yes. Now, you start disassembling that. You're going to need to weigh out your ingredients. Yes. And while you're doing that, we'll allocate Hannah some aspect of the kitchen and get her going as well. OK. OK, Hannah, you can have this side of the kitchen. Here is your recipe. It's quite a lot shorter than atoms, I noticed. That's good. I'm not complaining. And it's got butter on it, so. You're going to be allocated more engineering help as well in the form of an electric mixer. I've also got brown sugar. What is the difference between brown and white sugar? I mean, they come from the same cane, presumably. They do. They both suit crows, but brown sugar has molasses in it, which is the kind of leftover form when you refine sugar from cane. It's got that lovely caramel flavour. And that's added, actually, these days, to make brown sugar. In the old days, it was just a residue that was there, naturally. OK, right. Let's have a look at this recipe there. Way the eggs. Now, it doesn't actually specify whether you weigh them with shells or without. It's additional to where them with shells. Is it? OK, hang on. Right, they come out at 190. So it says here, measure the same amount of butter and sugar. So there we go. Nice. OK, we're going to put the place. Butter and sugar in mixer and cream until soft and white. Earlier on, we had a big discussion about which attachment to use. I'm not convinced that I've got the right one. I don't really know how to work. You're a bit of a mess. But nonetheless, nonetheless, let's give it a go. Well, in fact, there it is. Off it goes. I'm going to start slowly and work out. Basically, you've just turned up the revs. And so, I mean, no person can actually be that as fast as you're currently doing. Is there a limit to how much air you want in a cake, though? Well, that is a good point. So you could have too much in. And especially because we're using raising energy, we're using self-bracing flour, which has got sodium bicarbonate in it. And sodium bicarbonate is going to react with some acid, which is also in there, and going to create carbon dioxide. And that's going to blow those bubbles up that you're putting in there now, like a balloon. And that creates the foam. OK, let's give it a go. OK. Now, of course, a proper experiment would take each variable separately to truly judge how each change affects the results. However, we would need to make eight cakes for that. And even then, it wouldn't take you to account the most important variable of all. The difference between mine and Adam's culinary skills. Indeed. So we just went for two instead. We did save a lot of eggs being wasted. Now, someone who really knows their eggs is food critic and presenter of Radio 4's The Kitchen Cabinet, Jay Reiner. He has bravely offered to judge our cakey offerings. But first, what does he look for in the perfect sponge? When I'm offered a sponge cake, the one thing I'm really looking for is eatability. What I want to know is, not can I eat a piece of this cake, but could I eat three? It needs to be light, uncloying, more-ish. It needs to demand my attention. Obviously, all cooking is chemistry of some kind. But baking is dependent on getting that chemistry right. There is very, very little leeway. If you get it wrong, you will turn out a terrible, terrible product. No pressure then. Meanwhile, back in the kitchen, we've both been perfecting our cake batter, finally adding a teaspoon of ginger powder for flavouring. But Adam has managed to go off-road with some suboptimal mixing methods. Can I have a taste of that? I don't know, my little finger in. Traditionally, the little finger is the least dirty. Oh, I've got that. Really lovely. It's almost like a silver bag. You could eat that on its own. Yeah, I know. But oh, there's a grain in this of the flour, so that needs cooking. That's fair enough, could you make a cake? Yeah, but it's still a bit thick. Is it? Really? To my taste. What does that mean? Does that mean that there's not enough air in it? Potentially. Yeah, but there's the whisk right beside you. You've got whiskers not being used. No, but you don't whisk a batter, though. You don't whisk a cake batter. Well, that's how you're going to try and get air into it. How do you get air into it with a wooden spoon? Oh, I'm going to quickly do some remedial whisking. Did you add the eggs incrementally, by the way? Yes, I did it exactly as it says on the recipe. So I'm ready to go in the tin now. Oh, look at that. Oh, different, isn't it? You're looking at smooth mine. It does look like a disaster. It's much thicker than yours. It doesn't look like a disaster. Sorry, let's taste that. Look at all those delicious air bubbles. Now, that is much more currently, isn't it? So the sugar's having a big effect. So can I go into the tin now? No, go for it. A lot of people at this point will take a lot of care because you've got a lot of air in there. And if you start bashing it about and moving it too much, I do start bashing it about. Then the air will come out. But I want it nice and smooth on the top. Yeah, we'll smooth itself out because as it gets hot, it'll suddenly flow into the whole bar to the tin. You don't need to worry about it. That will all go. Okay. Ready to put them in the oven at the same time? Yeah. Ready, steady? Bye. Time for time. Time for time. Time for time. If all's gone well with the mixing, what is inside the oven now is a mixture of starch with a little bit of protein from the flour, the gluten and some protein from the egg. And then sodium bicarbonate is reacting with an acid to create carbon dioxide. That gas is joining the little air bubbles, which was put in by the mixing process. And as those bubbles expand, then the layers of starch become thinner and thinner and thinner as to become the edges of this foam. Now, that foam has to be strong enough to withstand. If it starts popping, then the whole cake will fall. As it grows, so the fat and the sugar should coat the sides because that weakens them and is going to give it that delicate crumb. And if you get that all right, then by the time it's risen, the temperature is high enough to basically cook the proteins. They freeze the foam in place and make it a solid. And then it won't fall down. And then you'll start to get a caramel, myad reaction on the top, which is a browning reaction to give it a lovely little bit of those kind of delicious flavours. And the ginger, giving it a little bit of spice, should be delicious. I'm going to get my now. I think it's ready. What we're looking forward to know this cake is done is a, the top, whether it's brown nicely, whether it bounces back when you slightly tap it with your fingers. If it does that, take it out, put a skewer in. If the skewer is completely dry when you put it out, it's done. So I'm just going to stick my skewer in. Oh, mine's looking burned. Come on, that is a classic cake. That's the cakeiest cake that's ever been cooked. And while my golden sponge floated gloriously out of the oven, Hannah's dense creature of darkness took much longer before it finally succumbed to the will of gravity. Here we go. OK. It's going about an extra 20 minutes. It's amazing, isn't it? Actually, the difference. Oh, my goodness. It's burst out of the oven. It's survived to fall, anyway. I'm surprised that all that happens to me. Is that have been any other part of the bake? That would ruin it, but actually, that was a good test. Could it bounce back? Now for the all-important judging. All right. So I am presented with two sponge cakes. I have no idea who baked which. Completely blind. The one on the left is a light brown colour gold. The one on the right is much, much darker. That would immediately lead me to think that the one on the right has been cooked with some kind of darker brown sugar, whereas the one on the left has been cooked with caster as it should be. Smell-wise, well, that's quite interesting. The darker one smells an awful lot more than the lighter one, which again leads me to think that a darker sugar has been involved in this. Right. Let's cut into them. So first of all, the lighter cake, cooked all the way through, a nice bake, as Mary Berry would say, I'm sure, although I am no Mary Berry. The darker one is firmer in all regards. It's definitely drier, but there is only one way to really tell the difference between cakes, and that's to eat them. So, the light one first. And it is very light. Soft, malleable, almost has a hint of ginger, but I'm not sure if that's just my imagination. The darker one is drier. So, I think it has to be said that we judge a lot of food by looks. And so, if it comes down to which is the one I would reach for, if I saw them on a table, it would be the lighter one. And which was mine? I didn't say he tasted better. I take no pleasure in my triumphant victory over you. Yeah. I'm not losing. I will not rub this in at all. That's all for this episode of the game, didn't I? Yes. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to who and what makes the perfect cake, can we say, cake solved? Well, as opposed to brown sugar gives a darker, more aromatic, caramelised cake, but it may take longer to cook as it's denser. Margarine, it turns out, is brilliant for baking as it has the perfect consistency to absorb air during mixing. Hand whisking can be better than electric stand mixes for creating a lighter, more springy sponge. And that's what makes a better cake. But the question is, who makes a better cake? And the answer is... Whatever. So, there you go. That was the curious cake off. Never to be repeated experiment, highly competitive. Who knew that we were so competitive? You know, who knew why I was... Not as good as you, making cakes. I mean, to be fair, actually. Michelle, I'll produce a... Brought both cakes into the radio for office. Yes, yes, and I... My cake was left in the tin while everyone ate your cake. No, I'm not going to say that. So, you finish. Michelle, I'll produce a bought both cakes into the radio for office. And I was there, and you weren't. And we didn't say who cooked either one. And they were both consumed in totality. Eventually. No, in about four minutes. Yeah, you're being quite kind here, because, actually, during that process of them being out, you took a photo and texted me, saying, the proof of the pudding is an eating. And what was in that photo? It was a massive, well over half of my cake left over, and barely any crumbs left of yours. Yeah, that is true. But, but, but, J Rainer did say, you know, the first bite you take is with your eyes. He didn't say that, because that's a stupid, pretentious thing to say. But my cake did look nicer than yours. It's true. Because I used cast-a-sugar and used Demarara. It's true. You're being very nice, but unfortunately, I'm too bad to lose them. I think there was urban sabotage. It was Michelle's ovens. She made me do the brown sugar one. I think that she wanted you to win. I think that's the only way to play. That seems highly unlikely to me to be perfectly honest. But we do, when there were multiple variables, we mentioned it in the, in the programme itself. You know, it wasn't particularly scientific. That's true. Now, in the last series, we asked you to send us in your suggestions for the name that we should give you on podcast listeners. And today, the day this podcast comes out, we are going to have a Twitter poll for you to choose from our four favourites. Yes. Now, some that didn't quite make the list, unfortunately. You sent a lot in. Oh, I mean, there were tons and tons. And loads, some not usable. No. So, keeping clear on people. Keep it clear on people. One I wanted to be included in the vote that was vetoed, weirdly. After the rather Freinians, which was a suggestion in the last series, and someone sent in a John Tebert from Washington, D.C. He came up with the suggestion of the Hannah Freigang featuring Adam Rutherford. Yes. I wasn't entirely happy with that as a suggestion. Not entirely, please. Michelle or producer, she thought it was a terrific idea here. But we are broadly democratic here. Great. Unfortunately, one veto allowed it. Yes, fine. So, we whittled down your bazillions of suggestions down to the four that we thought might make. Well, most sensible. And also, fit onto a poll that you might find on Twitter. But you don't only have the opportunity to vote on these on Twitter, you can also email in your favourite curious cases at BBC.co.uk. Because it turns out some people are not on Twitter. I know. What's that about? You make up for it, Adam. I am quite prolific on Twitter. Anyway, the four to choose from are Option 1, the Curios. We're not on a real estate preference, are we? No. Although, obviously, not one. Let's try that again. Without expressing your preference, Dr. Frey, Option 1, the Curios. Option 2, the Girard. Which is obviously my favourite. Now, we should explain this one, because in Series 1, what's Series 1? I think it might have been. Yes. The squeamish swoon. Yes. About why people fainted. Yes. Adam and I had some trouble in saying one particular phrase which appeared in a video that accompanied the episode. The phrase was, what about the Girard? You're just saying it now makes us laugh. But basically, there were many, many takes involving Hannah saying... I mean, at least 20. And I'm not exaggerating. And we've played that clip on other podcasts as part of the outtakes, where basically we fall about laughing because Hannah said something like, oh my god, but don't do that. But it's become a bit of a phrase for us. And later on in the series, we'll be talking about earworms. What about Girards as a little earworm for me? Anyway, so Option 2... God, it's taking a while to get through these. Option 2 is Girards. Option 3, Quidnunks. Quidnunks, Biddelatin. Yes, means intrigues person. Curios child? That was sent in by one of our young listeners, wasn't it? Yes, it was. Very clever, Biddelatin. Love it. Yes. So, today, the day this podcast comes out, check on Twitter for a poll that we will be conducting, somehow. And send us in your preference to curiouscasecerbibsi.co.uk. Yes, and we will have the results of that. By the next podcast, which we'll be out a week from today... Indeed. And from that point on, we will forever refer to you as one of the four options, either Curios Girards. Quidnunks. Or the Arregulars. So, the response filter is enormous. Yes, indeed. Well, that is it for today. So, bye! Bye! This is the BBC. I have another in my hand. I'm Tim Harford, the presenter of a programme called More or Less. And I have a confession. I've been tempted, lured, seduced into a soft embrace of numbers. To fight a new multiply. All around us, politicians, charities, campaigners and corporations know that a sure way to pick up some publicity is to make up an interesting sounding statistic, even if it's nonsense. Two times two is twenty-two. Four times four is forty-four. And on More or Less, that makes us sad, because we think numbers matter and the truth matters. So, we have two jobs to do. Destroy dodgy data with the rightest fury of ten thousand flaming sums, while also celebrating the ways in which honest statistics help us make sense of the world all around us. Politics, business, health and life. We got known because my heart is a trillion. We're here and most seems to pay for you. So, why not check us out? That's More or Less. With me, Tim Halford, on Radio 4, the World Service and available all year round as a podcast.
