I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. Hello, everyone. We've got a mega special double bill coming up. This is the first episode. Last week with the instrument special, we've promised you rock. And today we are bringing you rock. Actual physical rock as well. That's coming up. You know, we promise we commit and we deliver. We do. We do. Hannah actually goes down and handles some rocks later on. They are moon rocks. They are moon rocks because this is a double episode. All about the moon. Sometimes I can't tell when your sentences are going to end. You know, it's because I slightly go up at the end of sentences. Sometimes I look longingly over at you and you look confused. It's like it's your turn to speak now. Yes, now. OK, it's my turn to speak. Great. Enjoy the episode. Here you go. MUSIC In today's curious case, we are taking you off our planet and onto another world. Yep, this question was sent into curious cases at BBC.co.uk by 23 year old Harley Day from London and it reads, Why do we only have one moon? And what would life on Earth be like if we had more? I'll be over the moon if you can help me solve this mystery. OK, Harley, we do the jokes. It's a fine question anyway. We like the moon and this year is the 50th anniversary of one of humankind's greatest achievements, Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin stepping out of the Eagle Lunar Module to walk on another world. So to pay a small tribute to giant leaps, we are bringing you a special two-part episode celebrating our nearest celestial companion. MUSIC MUSIC I think the moon has fascinated mankind since the year dot. And if you look back in time, every culture has looked up at the moon and wondered. MUSIC We are really lucky to have our moon because there's nothing else like it in the solar system. We have a world on our doorstep. Even before we sent technology to the moon and people to the moon, we were thinking about the moon as our constant companion. MUSIC In this first episode, we are going back to the birth of the moon. Where did it come from? And why don't we have more than one? So first, we need to take a bit of a cosmic census. How many moons are out there and how unusual is ours? Well, Space Sciences, Maggie Adair and Pocock, Self-Confessed, Actual Lunatic, meaning she's an obsessive lunar enthusiast, and author of the Sky at Night's Book of the Moon. There were many, many, many moons in our solar system. I think at the last count Jupiter had about 67. I think Saturn has about 62. So there were many moons out there. We've only got the one moon, the moon. Not capital M moon. How unusual is that within the solar system? Well, as you look through the solar system, if you take the inner solar system, Mercury and Venus, they don't have any moons at all. You get to Earth, Earth's got one, and when you get to Mars, Mars has got two. But then as you move out to the ice giants and the gas giants, then there's a cluster of moons. So these big bodies further out in the solar system seem to have a lot of moons. So in that sense, we are unusual in only having just the one. Yes, there were lots out there. And also, if you look at the inner solar system, we have a significant moon, because our moon is quite large compared with our planet. Mars also has two moons, but they're sort of a bit diddy. And they look a bit like potatoes. OK, so they're not even spher eyes, or? No, no. Yeah, Fables and D must have a bit like potatoes, but very, very large potatoes. Yeah, it wouldn't be quite so beautiful when it came out for an evening under the light and two large potatoes in the sky. Not really very romantic, but listen, what is the actual definition of a moon if it's not a potato? So a moon is a natural satellite, but it's one where the center of gravity between the moon and the planet lies inside the planet. So for example, our moon orbiting us, the center of mass of that coupled system is inside Earth. Got it. So I remember when we did the fly past of Pluto a couple of years ago, that Pluto and Sharon, the center of the rotation is actually between them. Exactly. So the moon is too big or too far away, then you end up with a binary system, these two things orbiting each other, rather than one orbiting the planet. And of course, Pluto is not a planet as well. So yeah, apart from that, apart from that, whatever. Anyway, the point is that the number of moons that a planet has, and the shape of those moons, whether they're potatoes or footballs, that gives us a clue as to how they might have been formed. Right, but even up until the end of last century, people hadn't been able to agree about where the moon actually came from, and there were a lot of competing theories. So one idea was that the moon was sort of a passing body that got attracted by the Earth's gravity and sort of fell into orbit around the Earth. But if it was traveling through space, it would have a certain velocity, and it has a certain mass, because our moon is quite large relative to the Earth. But looking at the size of the moon, where it is now, that just didn't add up. Right, so it would have to be a pretty strong catch. Yes, that's it. As it was hurtling through. Right, for something of that size. So one other theory was that the Earth, as it was forming, was spinning and a blob of matter spun out into space. And that blob can geolped from one to a better word and formed the moon, and it was in orbit about the Earth. But again, the numbers just don't really add up for that. For the Earth to be spinning fast enough, for that to fly off. Why would it then be contained in an orbit about the Earth? So again, looking at the numbers, that doesn't add up either. Well, the numbers don't lie. Right, so the moon isn't a passing asteroid that just got snared, although that is how we think that Mars got its potatoes, Fobos and Demos. So where do we go from here? Well, data is what we need. And our theories on lunar formation took a giant leap forward. When we finally saw the moon up close. We copy it down, Eagle. Listen, uh... ...tanguality base here, the Eagle has landed. On the 20th of July 1969, after a nail-biting descent, watched by 600 million people worldwide. The lunar module of Apollo 11 touched down. Right, you're twinked. Clinged, well, we copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about the turn blue. We're breathing again. Thanks a lot. The main aim of the mission was to carry the first Earthlings to another world and bring them back home. But taking a little bit of the moon with them was also part of the plan. That's a very soft surface, but here there where I plug with the contingency sample, the collector I run into very hard surface. In this clip, shot by Buzz Aldrin from the Eagle, Neil Armstrong is using his contingency sample collector to harvest moon rocks. I'll try to get a rock in here. It's a couple. That looks beautiful from there, Neil. It has a start. The idea is all its own. It's like the United States. It's different, but it's very pretty out here. Almost 400 kilograms of lunar rocks have been collected from the surface of the moon during the six Apollo missions and three robotic Russian lunar probes. And these rocks have helped geologists to work out exactly how the moon was formed. Here in the basement of the Natural History Museum is an amazing collection of 5,000 pieces of space rock, including dozens of lunar samples and meteorites. Cosmic mineralogist Sarah Russell promised to show the moon. On display in the galleries, we've got two pieces of rocks collected by the Apollo missions. But here backstage, you've got some even more interesting lunar material, which are bits of the moon that fell to the Earth's meteorites. I can show you if you put your glove on. So this is our largest. There you go. It's quite heavy, isn't it? Look at that. A little bit of the moon. Yep. You know, I don't know if I'd spot it, actually, if I walked past it. Yeah, you need to have quite a good eye to just spot that it looks a little bit different. Okay. That's one of the key things about lunar rocks is that they're not that different to terrestrial rocks in a lot of ways. Cos it's got a bit of a reddish tone. It's quite almost like pockmarks, isn't it? So that's a bit of weathering that it got on the surface of the desert, which is where it was found. It was found in the Sahara Desert. And are they often found in the desert these things? Yes, because meteorites fall evenly around the whole Earth's surface, but in some parts of the world, well, if they fell in England, for example, it rains so much that over a few years, it would just weather away in disintegrating to the soil. But somewhere very dry, it can stay for thousands and thousands of years, so they can accumulate over time. And there are Bedouin tribes people who have actually got really good at recognizing meteorites because they can come across them quite a lot. So, okay, it's about the size of a paperweight, but on one edge, it's been sliced with a very clean cut. It sort of looks like salami. Yeah. It's kind of dark grey, but then with lots and lots and lots of little white flecks inside. Yes. So this is a dead giveaway for moonrock in that it has this black and white bits all coexisting together. So you have these white bits, which is mostly a mineral called anothite, and they're surrounded by this dark stuff, which is actually melted rock. When you look at the moon, I mean, there's sort of white patches on the moon. Is that what we're seeing? Yes, absolutely. Do we find that on Earth? We do find that on Earth. It's quite an uncommon rock type because it forms when a massive amount of rock all melts, and when that happens, the lighter minerals float towards the top, and that's what the anothocyte is. But generally, the elements on the moon are all the same as the elements on Earth, and they're found in similar proportions. So it's one of the clues that the moon and the Earth have a twin history. It was only after we traveled to the moon and collected samples that we realised these oddly speckled meteorites were actually lunar rocks preserved in the deserts of the Earth. Suddenly, we could put the moon under the microscope to try and settle the debate about how it formed, and it was these flecks of melted white rock that helped to cement a new theory about the origin of the moon. The idea is that the Earth is travelling through space, and along comes something about the size of Mars, and it's been called a fear. And so it comes in and hits the Earth with a glancing blow, yeah, cup out. And because the Earth has sort of had the huge impact, matter is thrown out into space, and this matter slowly but surely sort of coalesces to form the moon, and the moon is in orbit about the Earth. No, that sounds like a pretty bad day for Earth. I mean, you know, things may not seem great here sometimes, but at least we haven't been hit by a planet the size of Mars. Well, yes. Well, and I think the early solar system was very much like that. I like to call it cosmic pinball, because things were batting around all over the place. It was pretty chaotic back then. So, yes, the idea of a sort of a Mars-like planet hitting the Earth wasn't that unusual. This was pretty early on in the formation of the solar system, when the Sun and the planets played cosmic pinball. And this is how the infant Earth grew by hitting and fusing with small passing neighbors. And then along comes thea, a rock the size of Mars, which smashes into the Earth. But the question is, what happened to thea? Well, we think that the Earth basically ate it. Ha! Right. So this collision, it was so cataclysmic that the Earth and thea became hot enough that they melted and fused together. And any heavy metals they sank down into our core, and some of the surface, the mantle that splashed off into space, splashed off to form the moon. Right. And at first, the moon, it was just this whole ocean of molten lava. And the molten rock eventually cooled down to form this white material, anithite, which you'll find on Earth and you'll find in lunar meteorites. I see. Okay. So that is basically our best working theory for the formation of the moon. But going back to our listener, Harley's original question, why don't we have more than one? Well, that's because planetary systems that have multiple moons form in a very different way, as Maggie Adair and Pocock explained. When you look at a system like Jupiter with 67 moons, we believe those moons formed in the same way the solar system formed. So our solar system, we believe, was formed out of sort of a large cloud of dust and gas, which clumped together due to gravitational forces, forming bigger and bigger bits. And those bigger bits sort of clumped together and sort of formed planets. Now, on a smaller scale, if you have a sort of a planet like Jupiter forming, now Jupiter is very, very massive. I mean, it's huge. You can fit a thousand Earths into one Jupiter. So you can almost imagine a sort of a mini solar system forming around a planet like that. So in the disk that's around Jupiter, that's all just sort of left over from the formation of what, the planets or from the solar system. Yeah. So the whole solar system is forming, these lumps of matter coalescing to form bigger lumps, where you get something like Jupiter forming in the centre. The debris left around that may coalesce to form the moons of Jupiter. So, Dr. Frey, when it comes to why we only have one moon, can we say, case solved? Well, not yet. We think that our moon was formed from a giant impact with a Mars-sized space rock called Thea. This cosmic crash sent molten rock hurtling into space, which formed the moon around four and a half billion years ago. Not a great day on Earth. But what was the impact of that impact? And what would life be like if we had more than one moon? And that is our lunar question for next week. See you then. Okay, so that is part one. I just love this idea of Thea. I hadn't heard this before. I didn't know it. It's amazing. There are some amazing simulations in the published literature, so computer simulations of what happens. And using the word splashed off, it does actually look like that. The way that the simulations of the collision occurs, it looks like a sort of bowl of jelly that you've thrown a basket ball into. I like the idea that you can't find it. You can't look for it. You can't dig down and find it there because we are on it. Like it's sort of become us. Yeah, part of it. Well, most of Thea is 4.5 billion years away now. But yeah, bad day. It's cool. We've had that. Yeah. I mean, those times are behind us now. We don't need to keep going on about it. Yeah. But then in the next episode, which is going to be super exciting, we're going to be talking about, well, the results of that impact. It was a terrible day, but the results are worth what you have now. I don't know why did that voice. Good things came of it. Good things came of it. But what we're really going to do in the next episode is dig a bit more into Harley Day's question. But the thing is, he had quite a lot of questions. It was a long question. In many ways, you'd call this a greedy email. Oh, Harley was... We're given him two episodes, but ultimately he wanted about six. It was a long email. Ant Bartz. We've got one, another 15 minutes in the studio. So let's crack on with as much of Harley's question as possible. Yes, instead of this, our agenda. So this is his email. I realise you've had a few moon-based questions so far from Luna Lunacy, the bad moon rising to examining living on the moon, the space pirate. And in one case, even shooting lasers at the moon, my question is a little kinder to our orbital partner and is perhaps a little more general. I've also broken this question down into two parts, with a little bit for both presenters to keep each one happy. We should make a note here that Harley is both knowledgeable of previous episodes of the curious cases. Thank you, Harley. And of the fierce competition that exists between me and Asim. I think he's a... He's a Curial, isn't he? Obviously. He is a Curial. We still haven't got to the question yet. So why does the Earth, he goes on, have just one moon, while Saturn has loads, 62 according to Wikipedia, and Jupiter has loads as well. Why are we so short-change? What's changed indeed? I put this to our Cosmic Minerologist Sarah Russell. And to be honest, meh, I just liked her reaction. Here's what she said. No. I don't think we're short-charge. Our outrage by that. So we know on goes outside on a clear night when there's a full moon and looks at it and says, oh, I'm feeling really short-change, actually. I mean, we're so lucky, especially within the inner solar system, where moons are not to be found in abundance at all. And we're incredibly lucky to have, as I say, this companion in space. Well, quite so. I mean, don't annoy Cosmic Minerologist, that's what I'll say. No, they feel quite passionate about this. But then again, when I was talking to Maggie Adair and Poecox, she described the moons of Mars as being like potatoes. And so we were having some fun in the script that if the moon was a bit more like a potato, it really does ruin quite a lot of romantic scenarios. It does, it does, isn't it? Like, there may be trouble ahead. There may be potato lights and dancing. Jerry, don't let us ask for the potato when we have the stars. Now, I don't know, I don't get that, right? I don't think there are many people who are old enough to get that. It's a classic film. Now Voyager. It's like one of the, no, one of the, no, thank you. Looking through into the studio, Michelle's never heard of it. I just, RSM has been... I can see extremely niche. I think this is extremely niche. Well, potatoes. Anyway, yes. Bank of the Hullies, very high quality but long email. As a digital question, he writes, I wonder why the moon always faces the air. Why do we always see the face that the Apollo missions landed on? And we never see the side with the new Chinese Changi 4 lander from the beginning of this year. Then he writes, this bit is for Hannah since she complained about having too many biology questions on the show. Michelle clearly saw that in the email and thought, no, I'm overruling because she gave it to Adam. It is a good question. His language is good here as well because of course, we often talk about the dark side of the moon. And there isn't a dark side of the moon. That's a pink Floyd album. You don't get that reference either, do you? I know, I know who pink Floyd. I'm not more on. But that was in the 70s. I mean, that was before I was born. I know kids around the way would wear t-shirts with the thing on it, and they... Are you aware of anything that happened before you were born? Because there's like tons of stuff. Frankly, most stuff after I was born as well. And I was gone beyond the... You know the song. You know the album and the song. I know that I can picture the album in my mind's eye. Well, look, that is the pink Floyd reference. Anyway, going back to Harley's question, I did ask Maggie Adair and Pocoque this. Pink Floyd, dark side of the moon. There isn't a dark side of the moon, is there? Unfortunately not. There is the near side of the moon. The side of the moon we see all the time. Because if you look up at the moon and you see it, and then you see it, so again the next night, the face would have changed by a slight amount. But we always see the same side of the moon. And that's due to something called tidal locking. Now tidal locking is quite an interesting concept. And we see it in moons throughout the solar system. So what is tidal locking? Well, as the moon goes around the earth, it also retakes on its axis. Now when the moon first formed, it was much closer to the earth. And what happens is, as the moon orbits the earth, a certain side of the moon will always be facing towards the earth. And that side of the moon will feel the gravitational pull and the moon will actually be distorted towards the earth. So there is actually a physical movement of the moon rock towards the earth. Presumably by a tiny amount. It is, it's a measurable amount. Yes, a measurable amount. And it's of a few centimeters. And so as it rotates on its axis, the distortion is slightly out of sync with the pull between the earth and the moon. And so because this distortion is sort of like a gravitational lug, and that is out of alignment between the earth and the moon. So it acts almost like a hawk. So gravity is trying to pull that lug back into alignment. And so as the moon goes around, that lug is always slightly out of sync and the earth keeps on pulling it back into alignment. Now given enough orbits and enough rotations of the moon, that tiny, tiny pull that happened each time aligned the moon. So that lug, that bulge was always pointing towards the earth. Like that's a brilliant explanation, because I thought for ages I wondered whether it was just coincidence. Oh, see, but you're right, because you see tidal locking in many, many other moons. But the result of that is that the moon's rotation on its axis is actually the same period as it's orbit around the earth. And so that lug is always pointing out towards the earth. So it is actually kind of gently hooked in. Yes. Is it permanent that hook? It is. But it's interesting that on a much longer time scale, the moon is doing the same thing to the earth. So the earth will get tidally locked to the moon. Now we're talking about, I think it's 50 billion years, because the moon is much smaller for this that happens. So it's probably not anything to worry about. No, I think the lifetime of the sun is sort of a few billion years. So this is much longer than the lifetime of the sun. So it may never happen. I don't know if we'll be here by the time this actually happens. But it means if that happened, that on one side of the earth, you could see the moon. But on the other side of the earth, you'd never see the moon. Because that side of the earth would always be pointing towards the moon. And that side of the moon would always be pointing towards the earth. And that is actually the situation between Sharon and Pluto. They're in a staring competition between each other. Always facing each other. Yes. So if you're on the other side of Pluto, you will never see Sharon. You think that's quite fun. You think that's quite fun. You think that's really funny? I just like the idea of moons having kind of human names. I want a moon called Colin. It's not. It's from the ancient Greek. Ah, well, at least from the other. It's because Pluto is. Oh, I'm doing that thing again. It's stuff that happened before you were born, like ancient Greek stuff. Let it be. Pluto and his mate, Sharon. Let's keep going. In what is rapidly becoming the curious cases of Rutherford, Fry and Harley Day, he did have another paragraph like length question. He did. He did. Yes, I wonder what the effects of living on a planet with multiple moons would be. How might the seasons and tides be affected by having several moons? And what does that mean for the creatures inhabiting this planet or one of its moons? He goes on. And on. Would we have to live on moisture farms now? When I read those two words, I got quite excited. Staring wistfully into the sunset dreaming of the day when we can fly away with our droids, to perhaps find a more stable ecosystem. What's the moisture farm? Ah, you do. Wait a minute. He included a picture. Do you know what the picture is of? Yes, it's a Star Wars thing, isn't it? Yes, it's Luke Skywalker on Tatooine. But do you know what gave it away? All the 40,000 bloody YouTube videos that you've made me watch of Star Wars related nonsense over the years. Yeah, that's fair criticism. So the picture is of Luke Skywalker standing on Tatooine looking wistfully into the sunset and he's put a big sunsets. Yes, but that's the key thing, Holly. It's their suns. They're not moons. Tatooine in the Star Wars universe is a binary solar system, not a lunar system. I think I've actually embarrassed myself with that level of nerdery. That's pretty epic. But okay, that's fine. This is good because we are going to ask the question about binary moon systems in the next. Is that what they're called binary moons? To, I don't know. Whatever, more than one moon. In the next episode, we're going to address that. Multiple stars, though. That can happen. We know that. We know that there are binary solar systems already. Where? Out there. I nodded to my left. Then that way. Almost certainly correct. We are going to tackle this question there about multiple moons. It's going to feature a giant lunar pizza and some global tsunamis, which is something to look forward to. Yeah, I mean, the pizza, not the tsunami. Maybe not saying, when you hear a bit more about this pizza. Right. Now, that is quite a lot of Harley days. Excellent email, which we've enjoyed immensely. And we do have a whole other episode on this subject. But for now, it is time for... Curie of the Week. Okay, before we come onto the cure of the week, we're going to do that really annoying thing that people do. But when you watch Holly and Phil, right, on this morning, which I regularly don't do, again, you're lying. And they're talking about national television awards and stuff and asking people to vote for them. They manage to do it sincerely in a way that doesn't sound becky. Yeah, how do they do that? I don't know. I think we're doing it now, aren't we? I know. I mean, if there was a... Imagine if there was such an awards that might be called something like the British podcast awards. And imagine if there was a podcast so great that you thought that it deserved to be nominated. In a category where the listener chooses. Imagine that. Imagine that. Imagine such a thing. Well, then if that situation never were to occur, then you could go to BritishPodcastAwards.com, forward slash vote before the 15th of May. And you could make two podcast presenters extremely happy. But mostly a producer called Michelle Marting. And you know, you don't even need to live in Britain to do this. And we know that many of our curiots are all over the planet, including New Zealand. But you can also vote more than once. I don't know, whatever. That's voter fraud. And we do not endorse voter fraud. But you can. No, I mean, we don't even endorse necessarily voting for us. We're just putting the information out there. Right, should we move on to Curie the Week now? Yes, and we've got a food-based Curie the week today. And we did say we weren't going to do this anymore. But the volume of traffic is just relentless. There's a lot of stuff on scones and biscuits. Ah, scones and biscuits. And gravy. Yeah, but American gravy. Well, we were a bit confused because of that menu that one of our Curieos sent in, which included just baffling things like sausage, gravy, etc. So we're ignoring that. We're over that. Well, I think we're saying that one thing for sure is that we are never going to eat biscuits and gravy in America based on all the photos, these things, because it looks absolutely revolting. And secondly, we're going to leave that one be. Okay. But following on from the periodic table episode, we did have a food-based entry for Curie of the Week. And this is Jude Sachs, who tweeted us, I'm particularly proud of my 10-year-old daughter, Anna's discovery, which is the periodic table of sandwiches. Now, the periodic table of sandwiches takes the form of, as you might have guessed it, a periodic table. On the left hand side, you have bread. On the right hand side, you have sides. And in the middle, you have main fillings, say real one side, I believe, and sweet on the other. It's a work of genius. So in the columns, we've got white bread, brown bread, and rolls. Red pepper, bread. Pumpernickel, what's that? Pumpernickel, goodness. Pitterbreads and bagels. Over on the sides, we've got chips. Olives, crisps, and the age-old side that goes with everything, ketchup. So this is more like a sort of pub sandwich, where you get a crescent of pringles. Certainly, yes. On the side as well as some olives. In the main filling section, on the left, you've got the savories, which includes bacon, ham, egg, sausage. You know what she's done that's quite clever, is that she's like, as you go down the table, it sort of gets more meaty, right? So at the top, I think you've got, what's that? What's that? Cheddar, peanut butter. And look at that. And then bacon, ham, and then sausage, as you go down. It's just more and more pig. Yeah, but the real genius behind this is that, so in the main body, which would be the transition metals in the chemical table, she's got savory and meats on the left hand side, and sweets on the right hand side. But the middle column is mixing the two. Oh, yes. Turkey and cranberry. Cheese and jam. Cheese and jam. I don't think I don't think that's the sandwich. Maybe cheese and pickle. Peanut butter and jam in the middle. And then she's right onto banana sandwiches. She's just playing around. Anna, amazing. Amazing. You are Cure over the week. Certainly. The periodic table of sandwiches is a work of unprecedented genius. Well, that's all we've got time for this week. Join us next week for another episode on the moon. Oh, you. Why are you here? Have a listen to this, Richard. Forest, forest, forest. An environmental thriller for BBC 7. I'm so sorry. Me pan. Why? She lives a few centuries from now. After a day of crash that wiped out most records of life. So when she finds an old recording of a ring forest, she has no idea what it is. Forest, forest, forest, forest, forest. No, I'm not. I'm not sure. Forest, 404. Nine part three. Nine part talk. Nine part soundscape. Starring Paul Mackey, Tony Moody, and Pepper Haywood, with The Music by Bernobos. Subscribe now on BBC Salons. Subscribe now.
