I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. I do like it. We were going to get rid of that, weren't we? Yeah. We told the curios that we were going to get rid of that. I know, but you know what the real truth is. That we actually sat down and we couldn't think of anything better. No. It's true. So I think we'll start with that, unless someone comes up with a better idea. So send us your better idea and we'll put it in the file marked ideas from curios and we leave it to Michelle to decide whether she's going to... You can ask the curios to write us ding for us. Oh, well they ask all the questions for us. Yeah. Anyway, this episode today. Okay, so, right. There is one question that comes up quite often from listeners. That I have also desperately been wanting to investigate since the beginning of time. But once a fortnight, I begged Michelle to do this question. Yeah. Has the question come up frequently from curios? Or is it just you writing in dear curious cases? My name is Shoshanna Fly. I can neither confirm nor deny how many email addresses I own. Tell them what the question is. Okay, so it's actually... It's a thing out to why do people speak in different accents? And the reason why I really want to do this is because I just have always wanted to go and visit an accent coach. And I knew. I mean, at one point I thought, I'm begging Michelle so much to let me go and see what. And I suppose I'd pay for one myself. But I knew that I wouldn't find one as good as Michelle would find. She'd get me the best accent coach in the world. And finally, she has relented. And let me go and visit accent coach. Yes. So basically this whole radio program and podcast that we do, 12 series in now is basically been getting towards this point where you could get someone else to pay for you to have an accent coach. You can do it. You can be like, look for questions about bungee jumps and stuff and then get Michelle to send you bungee jump. Send in bungee jump questions and also more questions about making cakes as well because we really like doing that and it's up with cakes. And this is true. But anyway, on with the show, enjoy, enjoy my terrible accents. Welcome to Curious Cases where we answer your questions using the power of science. Today's case has been puzzling listeners from all over the world. We've had questions in from South Africa to Singapore. Including this one sent in to CuriousCases at BBC.co.uk from Sashin Bahaw from Toronto in Canada. It goes like this, how do accents start and where did they come from? Now, I've got to be honest with you. I have been desperate to do this question for about a year. I do know this because of all your notable characteristics, Dr. Fry, one stands out above all. Do you mean my magical ability with numbers? Nope. My hair? Well, it's very impressive, but also no. Dear listeners, Dr. Hannah Fry loves busing out regional accents, particularly Irish. Well, I do have an Irish family there in my thoughts. There is actually one accent that I have always wanted to be able to see, but I've never been able to master. Which is exactly why we have a range for you to see. An accent coach, Marina Tindall, she has taught everyone from Kenneth Branner to Uma Thurman and Eve and Queen Ellen Miran. And now, presumably the highlight of her career, she's going to coach you. You have promised to teach me a new accent, one that I've never actually been able to do. Which is Jordy. What I thought I'd do is first, we should look at the things that distinguish Jordy, I suppose, but tell us we're probably listening to someone who's a bit Jordy. So the first one is, you may or may not be aware that in your own accent, you have two Ls. Ooh, I was not sure. I mean, your accent, not everyone's accent. So you and I have two Ls, depending on whether we've stuck L right at the beginning of a word. So if we start to say the word little, yeah, exactly. And then at the back end of words, we've got, for example, the words football, we've got all, all, all, just like the back of the... Yeah, just like the feeling your tongue sort of feels almost like it's lifting up a bit. We use various terminology to describe that. We call it lightel versus darkel. Which is which? Well, so lightel, little, little, little, little, little, yeah. Darkel, all football table. A lot of southerners have a darkel that is sort of closer to a vowel, so football, table. The exciting thing about Jordy, this is not unique to Jordy, it's also the case in Wales and parts of Ireland, is that you've only got the lightel. Whereas you and I might with that sort of fat, squelchy L at the back end of a word. So I still feel full after gulping all that almond milk. And Jordy would take the light L that comes at the beginning of a word for you and me, and we couldn't paste it onto the back end of the word. So I still feel full. Oh, this is so good. Do it again, do it again. I still feel full. I still feel full. It's really hard. That's it. So you should just feel a buzz behind your upper front teeth. I still feel full. I still feel full. I can't do it. I still feel full from all that almond milk. Was that supposed to be Jamaican? It tells you I'm absolutely terrible at accents. Anyway, we will return to your Jordy forth with. Now, we should probably start by pointing out that there is a difference between accents and dialects. Absolutely. Okay, so dialects are the kind of words that we say and accents are how we save them. Okay, so if I said that picture on the wall over there was on the her, I would have no idea what you were talking about. Right, so I'm from Ipswich in Suffolk and that is an almost exclusively East Angleon phrase for, it means it's a bit skew-if. Oh, you mean one key? Exactly. The picture is one key. Right, so that is dialect then rather than accent. Exactly. Now, we've got that cleared out, so let's get back to the question. How did accents start? Where did they come from? I called up Professor Trevor Cox author of Now You're Talking, the story of human conversation. The thing about the vocal anatomy is it's very flexible. We can do lots of different things with it. And therefore, we can't talk in lots of different ways. And it happens not just in humans, it happens in animals as well. You have accents in fish and in birds. And of course, it's all gets tied into group identity because you then start thinking about, am I a member of the group? Did you start talking the same way as they do? And start talking differently to groups you don't like or want to separate yourself from? It's a sort of combination of in group selection, but also just natural variants in the anatomy of our vocal cords. Yeah, definitely there's a driver for, you know, am I a member of the group or not, but fundamentally it's about the fact that lots of language isn't really tied to what it's really talking about. So you have things like on a matter of beer like bang and pop. But most words, what we say and how we pronounce them is pretty arbitrary. All right, here's another question from Huang Fixaris. Why can't we hear our own accents? The thing about when we listen to things is that we have to decide what to attend to. Our ear holes, our ear canals are permanently open. And our brain has to do a sifting job. And it's one of the most clever things our brain does is sift through the carcophony we're listening to. If we hear someone talking on normal accent, that's not very remarkable, is it? So our brain probably registers it on a subconscious level. But if we hear someone who has gotten unusual accent, you know, someone outside of the vicinity that might be of more interest, then it becomes more apparent. Now normally we all breathe through life without even noticing our own accent. Unless of course something dramatic happens. My name is Debbie. I am 47. I am from Birmingham. In 2005 Debbie got married. So rounded by friends and family, she delivered a heartfelt speech at home. That is the accent that used to have and the person that I was. It feels like you've died and, you know, I won't hear my brummy accent. You won't ever be able to show who that person was anymore. Four years after her wedding, Debbie caught the flu and over the next month's and weaker. She started getting seizures until after one very severe fit. She completely lost her ability to talk. While recuperating in hospital, she slowly began to recover her speech, but her old voice with her familiar brummy accent had vanished. As my speech started to come back, it started to sound strange. I thought, why do I sound like this? You know, this is not how I talk. I went outside the front door and I saw my neighbour and I haven't talked to her for a long time because I've been so poorly. But she was with her grandson and he said, hey Deb, why do you speak French? And at the time I was like, oh my god, I sound like I've got an accent from somewhere else. That is really tragic and it's also really weird. So this is something called foreign accents in German. It's a very rare condition. It's only around 150 documented cases in the world. And it's usually happens as the result of some kind of brain injury that affects one of the language areas in your brain. But in even rare cases, it has been known to be caused by poisonous spider bites or even being struck by lightning. And how does it actually change your accent? Well, so as I learned in my coaching session, our accent is the result of very tiny little differences in the way that you move your tongue or your lips or your vocal cords. And if there's any upset to this incredibly delicately balanced system, that can end up making you sound completely different. All right, now Deb is started with a bromey accent, but she kind of sounded French. Do you think she sounded French though? I mean, I sort of get a little bit of an Eastern European twang there. I think some people perhaps just think she sounds like from somewhere else altogether. And the thing is, is that ultimately, accents are in the ear of the beholder. But for Debbie herself, when she lost her accent, she felt like she'd lost her whole identity. You don't really know who you are, because every time I opened my mouth, I hated that I couldn't sound like me. I wanted to talk to my husband in my voice. And I wanted to talk to my children in my voice. And I wanted them to hear their mum, but the stranger is in the room. And I don't like hearing her. And why does she have to talk every time I open my mouth? And it's kind of like you've died. And in the beginning, you are always trying to get back to that person. As the years go by, you learn to like the person that you are. We have kind of joke and say that if my voice ever went back to a bromey accent, everybody would think all that's really weird. The first ever documented case of this was a Norwegian woman who, during World War II, was injured in an air raid. And then everyone assumed she was talking in German, which was kind of unfortunate, because the Germans occupied Oslo at the time. So she wasn't very popular going around talking a German lute. Right, that's exactly the accent you wouldn't want to end up with in that precise scenario. But it does go to show how important our accent is to our whole identity and to how other people perceive you. Yeah, that's really central because I mean, I'm talking to you down a line here, aren't I? You can't see me. What you're picking up is all coming from my voice. You're starting to tell what my class is, well, from maybe things about, you know, might be guessing how big I am. All sorts of things you pick up from my voice. And part of that is that North South divide on how we pronounce vowels. And that's because in Britain, that's significant. Am I from the North? Am I from the South? It's such an important part of identity. And you're touching on what I think is going to be a radio for absolutely essential question here, which is the correct pronunciation of the small T cake spelt S-C-O-N-E. Well, there isn't a correct pronunciation because I don't want to get the emails. But it's funny enough there's a linguist called Adrian Lehman who's up at Langston University who produces magnificent scone map or should it be scone map with the British Isles. So he got people on an app telling how they pronounce different words and one of the things he asked about was scone. And so he has his colored map where in southern Ireland it's a really dark color because you're probably going to arrive at with stone. If you come from Scotland, you'd probably rhyme it with gone to get the scone and your scone pronunciations. I go for a scone, personally. But what's funny about it is people use that as a class marker. So people who maybe go scone are probably thinking, I sound a bit stuck up because I'm saying scone, for example. But actually, if you look at the data across classes, people pronounce it mixture ways. So it's a really poor marker of class. Well, that's a very diplomatic and scientific answer. Of course, the correct pronunciation is scone. But we will not get into whether you put the cream on first before the jam because I've been in some really bitter fights about that. Well, it's clearly cream before jam and any complaints should be directed to Adam. Curious cases at BBC.com. And I welcome the opportunity to ignore them anyway to wrap up this case. Let's see how Hannah got on with her Jordy lesson. So the second thing about Jordy is that unique among urban accents of the UK, there is no H dropping. OK, let me think so. Manchester. Yeah, I hope you're up there. I hope you're up there. However, in Jordy world, you will maintain your H, even if you know you're from like absolutely the heart of Tainseid. So an example would be, I hope you're happy that Henry Hart was home from hospital. I hope you're happy. That's it. That Henry Hart was home. I hope you're happy that Henry Hart was home from hospital. Home from hospital. Excellent. And now what we'll do is just to sex it up a little bit more. We will put that little sort of stop in the word Hart, a heartbar. Almost you do see the glottal stop in a lot of accents. It doesn't matter. You know, wrote in the letter. It's quite often lots of us use it as a pronunciation variant of T. So you'll get this in words also with P, like a piece of paper. You'll get it. That's it. You'll get it with the glottal sound afterwards. I'd love to put it in a sentence for you. Go on and go on. I'd like a proper pot of tea. I'd like a proper pot of tea, lovely. And then apple Danish. And then apple Danish. So good. With a cheeky little bit of butter. With a cheeky little bit of butter. Yeah. A cheeky little bit of butter. Love it. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to where accents come from, can we see a kiss so much? Yes, you can. Even some animals have something. Yes, even some animals have different accents, marking out familiar locals from exotic foreigners. We can't hear our own accent because our brain filters out information that's not useful or important. But for others, our accent is a rich vocal biography, revealing who we are, where we're from, and maybe who we're trying to become. Why, I'm on. Okay, I suppose we should offer an apology to the people of Newcastle for that. See, I mean, as was apparent in the one that attempts to do an accent in that programme, I am absolutely terrible at accents. You get what? I don't know. You've got some accents. What? Your mobster? Yeah, well, that's just based on watching too many Robert De Niro films. And it's so ridiculous. I mean, basically, you've got to put your shoulders up and do a lot of shrugging and sit in probably swear a lot, which you can't do on a muddy, fun-sting podcast. I mean, you've always got almost passed your ear. I'm just embarrassed to do that. Okay, well, I see one thing that was really interesting, the accent coach there, you see, said that she has been into classes before with loads of actors and said, can anyone do an American accent? And the room essentially ends up splitting in half with two accents emerging. And essentially, all of the boys do mobster. And all of the girls end up doing valley talk, like with real vocal fry. And it's really strange how this gender lines, like the entire continent sort of split on genderline, mobster, valley girl. I thought you might do it like a real, you know, sort of deep text and draw. I can't even do that. That's quite manly, again, isn't it? It's just sort of imagining a cowboy. Yeah. Well, it's like a question of what we said at the end is, you know, who you know, who you know, and project yourself as, but we have to deal with the issue in hand that was raised and we kind of glossed over. Now, I believe we've satisfactorily dealt with the pronunciation of the word that has spelt. What's going? Spelt. Yes. What did you just say? It's going. You say scone. Yeah, I do. It's because I'm common, isn't it? It's not. No, no, no, no. Do you say scone because you're really par. No, I say scone because that's not most English people say. No, no, no, no. DONE! What they do. Because Trevor Cox has presented the map that's been done by the people who bow down to his data. But the, I reckon, as you should do, being a data scientist, the, I reckon it's because you've come from an Irish family because the biggest concentration of people who say, how do you say it? Scone. Scone is in Ireland. Is it? Yeah. So I bet you've grown up in a family where they've said scone all your life and you've just absorbed that. Actually, it's a feeling of, you know, the Irish part of my family only every boiled ham boiled potato. Yeah, but you know what? Yeah, but you know what? We're, we're, we're, we're, we're glossing over the much more important issue, which is not the pronunciation of the word scone. It's whether you put the cream on before the jam. And you said a crazy thing in that, in that episode. Nick, I refused to bow down to your clearly incorrect ideas. Scone tyranny. I don't know. You can't, but it's just, I mean, this is like physics. You can't possibly put the cream on first because it's softer than the jam, which means that the, you know, you need a, you need a solid base to put the cream on. I'm sorry, but it's just categorically incorrect. It's categorically great. Look, you clearly have more cream on the jam, right? Yes. Obviously, because it's the nice like cooling flavour. We agree. And so why would you put on the smaller bit underneath? It doesn't make sense because you want to be able to see both of them, you want to eat with your eyes, right? So you want to put on the cream first. You have the nice big, whopping dollop of cream. And then a tiny little bit of jam on top, just for that little extra bit. Just put garnish underneath the soup. Do you? Well, I think we might stir it in. But that, but the simple physicality of trying to put some sort of jammy and sort of semi-solid on top of something which is fluffy and light. I mean, it's just going to... What clotted cream? Yeah. Being fluffy and light. Actually, I think in 12 series, this is the first time we've actually come to blows about anything. But this is, I'm sorry, but this is madness. Yeah. And I think, I think we need the curious to sort this out. Yes. Yeah. So vote like for cream first. And R.T. for jam first. And that's the end of this week's curious case is some possibly end of this. I don't want to work on this programme anymore. Right. And Jacob. Back to access. Back to access, say it. But anything, say it. Yeah. So as we mentioned in the programme, and as you just mentioned at the beginning, this is, I think, probably just checking with Michelle, I think this has probably been the most asked question we've had in 12 series, at least one off. One of the most popular, yes. Okay, so I think it's fair to say we've had almost more variants on this question than almost any other subject. So here's a couple just for the curios. This one was from Louise Cranso from Durban in South Africa and she asked, why do accents stay in one geographical area? Here's Trevor Cox again. Well, it could be for a variety of reasons. So I'm up in Manchester here. And only about 30 miles away we've got Liverpool. And you've got the Mancunian accent and you've got the Scouse accent. And that's still maintaining. Why? Because for centuries, Manchester has been arguing with Liverpool. We've got so in-sense to with them. We built a whole canal so we didn't have to go and trade with them and can bypass them. So the identity of whether you're from Liverpool and Manchester is incredibly important. And so that persists. So some of it's just a cultural thing, but it can also be a geographic thing. I mean, if you've got a great big mountain range between you and the next door tribe and you don't mix, then there's no reason why your accent should blend. I mean, you mentioned Liverpool and Manchester that were separated by only a few miles. Well, does the UK have... Do we have a high concentration of accents? Yeah, in England, it is incredibly high concentration. They say it's about 20, 25 miles, I think, and you move to another accent on average. I mean, people will argue the difference between Wigan and Widness, which are really close to each other. And it's just little subtle changes of pronunciation. I mean, it comes down to in Britain is you look at the patterns of who ruled who, which developed those accents, and then they've just kind of been maintained. Well, what I'm doing now, the standard radio for an answer with my received pronunciation, even though I'm from Suffolk, that's actually a relatively modern phenomenon, isn't it? Well, actually, it arose in the 19th century. So from an accent point of view, it's relatively new, and it kind of become the educated class's accent. So it's the accent you heard in the court, and in universities on the stage, and your ambassadors would use it. But go back a century earlier in the 18th century, when Dr Johnson produced his famous dictionary, he didn't actually say how words would be pronounced, because there was no agreement at that point about how different words would be said. So RP is this kind of relatively new thing, 19th century, and of course, then the BBC took it up in the early 20th century, and then it became even more ubiquitous in terms of prominence. Yes, I do have a fairly standard RP, you've always done your proper RP. I think I've said this before in this programme, but actually, the accent that I grew up with is a lot more ethics to be honest with you. I like drop my teeth, like barely bobbled rages. The thing is, when I first started at the radio for, Michelle was like, no. I did not like such a lie. I saw it was true, I just... You know, what would happen would be, you should just say, she just wanted to give that one another go. She did it very kindly, sometimes what she was doing. Sometimes she rates us out of 10 when we've done some of these recordings, sometimes she goes, yeah, yeah. Maybe do that one again. Maybe. But let's rubbish. It's time. Yeah, try and do it just a bit less rubbish. Yeah, she comes across as really nice, but actually, she's just incredible taskmaster. No, no, she's the best, she's the best. Anyway, that thing about the distance that Trevor talks about. Yeah, that's true. In the British times, you've got this real density of accents, you know, Liverpool, Manchester being right next to each other, very different accents. You know, new accents every 20, 25 miles or so. And I think that, you know, ultimately, that's going to keep accent coaches like Marina Tindall in her work, right? You know, there's so many. So I asked her whether there was somewhere that she thought had the highest concentration of different accents. There are certainly bits of the UK where, for example, Ireland, where natives of that region will say to you, not only can I pin down from hearing a stranger what region they grew up in or what town or what city, but I can actually probably pin down the postcode. You know, that's the sort of thing you think are you having me on and your eyes kind of roll around in the back of your head, that what? But it's true. There are some places where very few people have moved greatly outside, you know, their own place of origin. And so accents tend to be relatively, I suppose, to use landscape terminology unspoilt. If you like, yeah, in certain parts of England, people do say, well, yeah, I can tell their religion. I can tell probably what football team they support, you know, and I think possibly in more urban areas, things become more hybridised and more watered down around the edges. I always think that, actually, my family are Irish. But I always think when people talk about Irish accents, they imagine that it being this completely uniform thing. But the variation in Ireland is absolutely massive. Yes. There's sort of the like, the rhythmic Irish, the Italian Dublin. Yeah. And then there's the bit where my family are from, which is more like breeding out while moving your mouth. Wow. It's more like, come on, I'll put it right. It sounds like the scene in Hot Fuzz, where the guy has to go through three phases of translation to get a career result. Exactly. Where's that? In Offly. I imagine going to see a doctor in that town and then being like, wow, really? It's totally for you. We also had a question in from someone called Vanessa Vimmer. I'm going to go with that. She asked, why do Americans love British accents? And then the PS on the end said, PS, Hannah, my husband finds your accent particularly attractive. Well, I think so when you're this, but it's entirely put on. I like that. You can kind of find yourself at the heart of some weird long-distance psychological threesome though. Yeah. My husband likes your accent. I will say there's something about the switch from UK to US English. And that's the fact that American English and British English, depending what your native side of the Atlanta gears, carries just the right mix of sameness and otherness about it. And I think that's a combination that's quite potent. You know, there's a whole two countries divided by the same language. Somebody shares broadly our language and our way of relating to the world, but their world view and their sense of themselves in space is refracted through a completely different lens. And that sort of manifest in the voice. There's also an exoticism that's one-sided with British accents. I think in the UK we grow up with more of a plurality of references for what an American accent is. Whereas, you know, unless you've got BBC America or you're a hot house in Monty Python from a young age in the US. And I think British accents are period drama, you know, sort of modest rippers. They're James Bond. An American friend of mine said, well, it's Mr. Darsie coming out of the lake. And I said, but he doesn't even speak with his accent. He just sort of comes out being beautiful and soggy. He doesn't say the thing. She said, no, but we've already, by that point, decided that there's this house, Mr. Darsie talks, that sort of rather staccato way and everything's very held in. So you decide there must be enormous steaming passions barely restrained. That's certainly why I like to think of myself. Exactly, yeah. Yeah. So, yeah, various labels get thrown out. You know, they're stylish that we're sort of more cultured or more intellectual. I think those who do feel that flatter us enormously. Well, there you go. How you've got some some particularly specific fan mail there. Yes. Happy with that. Some accents are definitely more appealing than others. I wouldn't necessarily rank the accent highly. But I think, you know, I think some like that rhythmic Irish accent is very, very appealing. You know, Italian accents, people were very cute. You and I have spoken before about German accents being... Yes, not a German accent. I think German is the sexiest language on earth. He's not being sarcastic for me. I genuinely mean that. The thing about how Brits are perceived in America is definitely something I've experienced. And it's not just the accent, which I have to confess. I do slightly ham up in American teaching. Do you come extra English? Yes, quite posh. There was a meeting once, years ago in New York. And we were talking about, I don't know, delivering some article for a magazine. I was working on, and I said, well, I think what we need to do is revisit this in the fortnight's time. And they started giggling to very senior women at this publishing house started giggling. And I sort of continued talking, and then I think I said, so it's agreed that we'll speak about this in a fortnight. And I had no idea that Americans don't say fortnight. They don't? No, and they thought this was the most... What did they say? Two weeks. They just don't even have that word. That was my understanding. And so from that point on, whenever I get to America, I'm like, oh, well, do I have any call back in a fortnight? Swoon. It's very persuasive. Goodness, I feel like I'm in the right impregnative. I'm going to emerge from a lake with a white shirt on and just shout, I'll see you in a fortnight. I think that's what that scene was missing. Yes, if there's one thing that Jane Austen could have done better, it was references to 14 days for the American audience. She wasn't thinking clearly. She wasn't. Do you know what time is? What time is it? Curious of the week time. All right, so this is relevant to our accents episode this week. It's a piece of correspondence after... Do you remember... Do you remember bruschetta games? Bruschetta games. Bruschetta games. Where someone was extremely, extremely upset that one of us dained to use the word bruschetta. Right, so the email came from someone who simply refers to themselves as JZ. It could be JZ, the rapper who's married to Beyoncé. I'm not sure. Here's what they said there. There are a lot of English speakers around the globe of which I am one, being a Canadian American. Some of us have stumbled upon your podcast. Read the pronunciation comments in episodes such as the lucky number. You did indeed use the term British English. Note, we speak a version of British English in Canada as do Aussies and others. He goes on. You think it's a he? Well, who knows. They go on. 400,000 North Americans say ballet for ballet. Ballet, as you suggest, is standard on your shores and would sound quite foreign to our ears. New Zealanders may also say ballet or premier for the opening night of an event or premier for party leaders such as the head of an elected government. It's very difficult to do this letter without sound like we're being really judgmental. Sorry, JZ, it's a great letter. But we'll just keep going. In multicultural cities such as Toronto, we know to say brusqueta, not brujeta or brujeta. So, wait, which is the right one? That's one of my favourite letters. It's one of my, you know, actually one of the things I've the difference, an American accent, an English accent, in an American accent, Mary, Mary, and Mary all sound the same. May I know? Like the... Mary, Mary, Mary. And Maryland. Maryland. I said once, probably in the same meeting when I said fortnight, and they laughed at me again for basically mispronouncing it completely. But I love this letter. You know, the thing about this letter is that JZ, until you're now become known, or they're now become known, have, you know, phonetically spelled out all of these words for us, which I think is a great amount of effort. And just I think goes to prove that you can pretty much say words, however you damn well, please. Right, and my dad, who is born in Scarborough, but raised in New Zealand and has a English middle class accent now. He didn't come back until he was in his 20s. His sister, my aunt, she stayed in New Zealand. She's still out there. And when I see her, my name, Adam, Adam. It's not with an eye. It's not with an eye. It's not with an eye. Two eyes, I think. Sometimes I can't even hear her. She's like, Adam, what, me? Who's Adam? I die if you're listening. I love the way you say, Adam. And Irish family, you're listening. I love your accent. It's all brilliant. Anyway. All right, that is the end of episode two. Remember that you can subscribe to our show on BBC Sounds, the very new Spanglish sparkling BBC Sounds. Super sparkly, spangly new app, BBC Sounds, where we have answered about a billion more of your questions. Certainly have. And in the meantime, if you have anything else that you would like us to investigate, please do send us an email, curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. See you next week. And it's jam before cream. It's not. You're wrong. Why is it that some people pretend to support a football team? It's important questions like that I'll be looking to unravel with the help of Top Expert, Psychologists and some big sporting names. In my new podcast, don't tell me the score. We'll be dissecting sporting themes like tribalism, the power of belief and the art of resilience to uncover important answers about life and the world around us. Forget the results, tactics and cliches about two halves. This is a sports podcast, the likes of which you've never heard before. Subscribe to Don't Tell Me The Score with me, Simon Mundy, on BBC Sounds.
