I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. This is not a programme of that boxing. No, but it is about super athletics. People at the very peak of their physical achievements. The limit of what humans are capable of. And and and and Michelle Marson. And Michelle Marson. So we're finally getting our revenge on all evil experiments that she set us up on over the years. By making her do the first bit of exercise she's done in 25 years. Yes, yeah. And both Hannah and I have got minor injuries which prevent us from engaging in the test that you're going to hear in a few minutes time. But is that she true by the way? It is. I mean, I did make more of it than I perhaps needed to. I've got a bit of a herty ankle from twisting it from playing rugby. Yeah, I've got a slipped disc in my back from being tall lying on the sofa a lot. But Michelle, she stepped up to the plate although it wasn't baseball. And she did exactly what was asked of her above and beyond just being a radio producer. And you know one thing I can guarantee, dear listeners, is that Michelle's time is going to shock you. Oh yes it is. Anyway, on with the show, but just a quick a quick message we've got a very special guest coming in at the end of the podcast. But I think the first time ever we've got the person who asked a question on your marks. Get set. Go. This question was sent into curious cases at BBC.com UK by Greg Jenner. He asks, what's the fastest a human could run and would we be faster as quadrupeds? Okay, now this surely calls for one of our famous experiments. Now Hannah and I are both finely tuned athletes. Our bodies are like coiled springs. Oh indeed we are. But unfortunately at the moment I've got a slipped disc in my back. Oh no, and I have got a sprained ankle that is actually true. Disaster. Which really leaves us with only one option producer Michelle. Oh yes, an expert on corralling wayward science broadcasters but perhaps not exactly known for her love of athletics or exercise in any form. Perfect. And I know just the person to test Michelle's top speed sports scientist, Polly McGwiggand has promised to push her to the very limits of human performance in the 100 metre sprint. We've come down to Bath University. Polly and I are standing trackside and of course Michelle is here. Trainers on, standing in lane three, how are you feeling? Pretty nervous. And Polly you've set up some equipment halfway down the track and at the finish line if Michelle makes it to the finish line. Yes we've set up some light gates between 20 and 30 metres which will hopefully pick up your maximum velocity in that period. What are you aiming for? My aim is to get to the end without any sort of injury or needing medical assistance. You ready? Should we do this? Are you singing the rocky theme tune in your head? It really helps. Polly marks. Get set. Why did you stop the clip there? Why didn't you play it all? I mean it can't have been longer than more 15 seconds in total? Yeah it was a bit longer than 15 seconds to be honest. Oh I see. Well okay while we're waiting for Michelle to finish, a brief history of running really really fast. In 720BC Greek runner Orsipus from Maghara Cutter Dash when he was the first Olympic sprinter to run naked or Ginnoss as it was known which is the origin of the word gymnasium. Roger Bannister closed it may not have been the first person to complete the four minute mile. In 1770 London Fruit and Veg Seller James Parrot won a bet of 15 guineas by running a mile down Old Street in under four minutes. However the report in Sporting magazine didn't appear until 24 years after the race and nobody has been able to prove the record since. In 2007 American astronaut Sunita Williams ran the first marathon in space, setting off at the same time as her earthling counterparts in the Boston marathon. Suni was harnessed to a treadmill on board the International Space Station and completed a space race in four hours and 24 minutes. But when it comes to sprinting speed do some of us have a natural advantage? Well I also one of the world's leading experts in running biomechanics Peter Wand from the South Methodist University in Texas. There's an old track and field adage that sprinters are born and not made. Certain things are necessary. A certain body frame you can be excessively heavy, having too much mass is a bad thing. A predominance of faster twitch muscle fibers is also important. So your body has a variety of fiber types and essentially the easy way to think about fast and slow muscle is that it's the equivalent of gearing on a bike. So for different circumstances you want to use different gears higher or lower. So the slower twitch muscles those in your legs are the ones that you predominantly use just for standing or walking. They don't contract as rapidly, they don't generate forces rapidly, but when you want to go very quickly you call on the fast twitch fibers there. More forceful muscle fibers that apply force to the ground in shorter periods of time, but they fatigue rapidly. Now some people have suggested that sprinters have a much higher proportion of these speedy fast twitch muscles gearing them up to run full pelt for short periods, whereas marathon runners have more slow twitch fibers fortifying their bodies for hours of endurance, but it's not quite that simple. There's a predominance in say marathon runners of slow twitch fibers and a predominance of faster twitch muscle in sprint type athletes, but there's no absolute. So in the early classic studies there were some endurance runners that had as much as 50% fast twitch fibers. So fiber types fast and slow are not a magic bullet for performance. It's very interesting that because there is this widely held belief that sprinters have more fast twitch muscle cells and that this is also associated with being of West African descent. And then I guess likewise long distance runners slow twitch muscles, Ethiopians, Kenyans always tend to do very well in those kind of events. And we do know the genetic basis for some of that success, which is that they have evolved in high altitude places where there's lower oxygen. The interesting thing is the same mutation in those genes exists in Nepalese people and in some Dutch communities, but of course they're not famed for being hugely successful long distance runners. So there's a combination of things here, there's the genetics, but there's also how much you culturally are interested in being good at a particular sport. Exactly. And very difficult to separate all of the strands that make you a freakish outlier in terms of success as an athlete, which is something that Michelle most certainly does not have. As we discovered, when we went to measure her top speed with super sport scientist Polymer-Guygon from the University of Bath. It's a powerful start. It's coming up to the first marker which is set at 20 meters. And that's to record maximum speed. Yes. She is more than half way now, pumping those arms. She's trying not to laugh. Come on, push through to the end, push through, push through, I've only done it. We're running over to Michelle to see how do you feel? They're so stupid. That is really fun. Why didn't I? You didn't die. Poly, come on over. Did the equipment work? The equipment did work, yes. And do we have a time? We do. Michelle, you ran 100 meters in 24.65 seconds. 24.65. Oh, and how fast is the record? So the world record holder is Florentz-Gryfft Joyner-Flodjo. And in 1988, she ran the 100 meters in 10.49 seconds. 10.49. So you're a little bit over double the world record from Flodjo. How do you feel about that, Michelle? Well, on one hand, I feel quite disappointed. On the other hand, I feel just delighted that I'm not leaving here in an ambulance. So it's a win that you actually survive. You did it with your shoelace on tide as well, I noticed. Well, if that had been done up, you would have been sub 15. That is what we're doing. Oh, Michelle, what was her top speed in the end? It was about 12 miles an hour. Just in touch behind the fastest woman ever recorded Flodjo there. As with the fastest human, well, that is Usain Bolt. This is where the glory begins. It's when you pass the finish line. I do what I want. It's so great to the world. You crazy stuff. I put my flavor to it. Bolt ran the fastest ever 100 meters, 9.58 seconds at the World Athletics Championships in Berlin in 2009, with a maximum speed of a very nippy 28 miles an hour. So what is it that makes Usain lightning bolts the fastest human on earth so far? I asked Polymer Gwiggen. Well, the thing that makes Usain Bolt different as a sprinter is he's very tall. Most sprinters are around six foot. Usain Bolt is six foot five. With that increase in height, he's got longer legs. And that means that every step he takes, he travels about 15 centimeters further. Having said that, there is no reason why people can't continue to run faster. That will depend upon how much force they can generate with the muscles of their legs to support their body weight. You're confident that Bolt's record will be beaten. I don't see any reason why it won't be beaten. Somebody else will come along who has those extraordinary abilities and can just tweak one little bit of it, which means that they will go faster. You've seen her performance today. Do you think that person is our producer, Michelle Martin? Probably not. Oh, but fair. Yes, I know, but you have to ask yourself, can you say in Bolt using Omnidirectional Microphone to record a location piece in an echoey sports hall? Wouldn't you be wondering that? Well, I might have been anyway. Now, if we want to predict how fast a human could run in the future, we can look at the data, take past performance and extrapolate into the future with a delicious bit of maths. And someone who's done just that is professor of sports engineering Steve Hake from Sheffield University. What you see is see performance reaching a limit. And in a few decades time, we reckon it level off to about 9.41 seconds. And we're not going to see people running the 100 metres in eight seconds any time soon. I don't think so. I don't think so. Okay, now the second part of Greg Jenner's question was whether or not we would be able to run faster if we were quadrupeds. What's your take on that? Well, that's a really great question. When that was posed, I thought, well, okay, how would you actually do it? So of course, I was in the office, so I gave it a go. You ran down the office on all fours? Well, not ran. I mean, it's really, really hard. So, so what it is, I looked at something called the frowdy number created by Professor Rob Alexander to look at gates and how you scale up different gates for different animals. He got into it because he was trying to work out how fast dinosaurs would run. And what Prof Alexander found was that the running speed of an animal was proportional to the square root of the length of the limbs. Is that where the number comes in? Yes. So I thought, well, okay, if we were a Patas monkey, in a Patas monkey, you can run about 34 miles an hour. I'm about 80% longer in all my limbs than a Patas monkey. And that means that I would probably go something like 45 miles an hour. Much faster than we can go standing up. Yes, yes. And hey, Presto, I found out that there was a Japanese guy called Kenechito who'd actually tried this. And he managed to run a 100 meters in 15.71 seconds. As running as a monkey? Running as a monkey. So he'd trained for 10 years. And I'll tell you what, 15.71 seconds, that is really fast. Hang on then, let me get this right. Our producer Michelle, who had a time of 24 seconds, was beaten by a Japanese man running as a monkey. Yes, by a long way. So Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to how fast a human can run, can we say K solved? Well, Dr. Fry, the current world record holder, Usain Bolt, has a top speed of around 28 miles per hour. The rate that we're breaking world record is slowing down, which could mean we are reaching the limits of natural human performance. But we could run a lot faster if we were long and slender and ran on all fours, like a pattas monkey, with potential speeds of 45 miles per hour. But could a monkey produce a radio 4 program? Right, probably best that we don't answer. That question right now. Probably best. No, because now we're into the podcast where you are very, very specifically in the hands of Michelle, I'll produce a huge sitting just over there behind the glass. You know what, though, the thing is I wasn't there, right? And neither was the Japanese man running like a monkey. But I liked to imagine, I like to imagine that if he was, Michelle would be barely past the halfway mark by the time he was relaxing at the finish, while possibly having a cup of tea. While a man skipped past her on all fours, yes, it's an enduring image there. Now look, we've got very, very super special treat. Was I excited about this? We certainly do. Eagle-eared listeners may have noticed that our questioner this week was the one and only Greg Jenner who you may recognize from the very first series in which he came to answer a question about mobile phones. Greg Jenner is a historian. He is one of the key people behind the BBC's horrible histories and he's also here. Very long-term listeners will remember that this was an episode from the first series, the very first week of curious cases. And one of the conclusions was that it was best to wear trousers when answering the phone. Always be formally dressed. And it's a very hot day. Are you wearing trousers? Neither of you are wearing trousers. We've both got our knees out. I have to say I'm actually utterly ashamed of the fact that I'm wearing shorts in a professional situation. It's unacceptable. Greg's half French, so that's probably the exact same. You are sitting under the desk there, so I can't actually tell. I'd like to apologise to all the listeners for the fact that I'm wearing shorts. It's just not okay. Anyway, Greg, hello. Welcome back. Thank you for having me. Well, thank you for asking a brilliant question. Why did you ask this question, Greg? This is a question that has dogged me for years. I love running. And when I say that to people, they go, I mean jogging, I go, no, no, I love going as fast as I can. I'm like a sort of human springer spaniel. I'm sort of floppy-eared and small and wearing and annoying. And I just bound around, I love sprinting. I love the sensation. I love the wind in my hair. I love the sort of pumping arms and legs. Do you just describe the dog there? I know. Do you go out of an afternoon and do some sprinting? Yes. Do you really? I really do. Yeah, so when I was younger, I used to be quite sporty, but I had really bad knees. And it always sort of really bugged me that I was never as quick as I knew I could have been because my knees were sort of really annoying. And now I'm in my mid-30s, and I'm sort of basically facing death. I'm sort of trying to restore my childhood by going out, and yeah, I go out sometimes sprinting on my own. I mean, don't take this the wrong way, Greg, but I would say you have more the stature of a marathon runner than a sprinter. No, all the listeners, Greg, is lean, sinewy. I could pick him up, put it out a bundle of tight, coiled energy. I'm a tiny man. Is what you're trying to say? You could pick me up. I am a ten-stone weakling. I am pure, just hair and limbs. Fast limbs, they have to click and you run. I haven't timed myself in a long time, but I used to be sub-12 seconds. 12 seconds! What the heck? That's faster than the Japanese science is pretending to be a monkey. That is actually ridiculously far. I don't actually think I've much much faster than the Japanese runners. If I'm properly sprinting on a treadmill, I reckon I can get up to about level 14, so 14 kilometres an hour. Okay. And I think that Paula Radcliffe, for example, does a 40-kilometer marathon in a round about two hours. She's running at level 20, just for that sustained amount of time. And that's mind-boggling to think how much faster proper sprinters, including yourself, Greg. I'm not a sprinter. When I was younger, I just loved running and was quite good at it, but I had these very bad knees. Now, I'm much slower, I'm sure. So, I'm not a sprinter at all. I would be destroyed by anyone who was competent at running, but I'm naturally quicker than your average bloke, I guess. What do you reckon you could do it in? Now? Yeah. Well, no. At your best, 40 or 50 years ago. Well, I'm just going to ignore that. I know my physiology quite well, because all the sports I have ever been good at and been interested in it. I feature a lot of explosive energy. And so, at school in the 50-meter sprint, I'd come in the top three. In the hundreds, I'd come in the top five, 200 top eight, 1500 never finished. So, when I'd love to do the whole fast twitch muscles on myself, because I think I'm just one fast twitcher and have no slow twitches. Cricket is my sport, and I've been a wicket keeper since I was seven years old and still keep wicket now. And that is a sport where you spend a lot of time standing around, but I have to do about 150 star jumps a day. I think I've got so many fast twitches that I could probably make it across to you very quickly, but by the time I get across to Greg, I'll be just exhausted. I'm trying to imagine you in the park, though, Greg. Do people look at you weirdly when you're just sort of doing a little sprint and then trotting around and doing another little sprint? Probably. Yeah, I mean, I do it in my drive. Do you have a little road just outside my house? And yeah, on a Tuesday, I play football on a Tuesday and on a Tuesday, when I get back from football, I'll quite often do a 30-minute short sprints up and down just to sort of practice it and feel like I'm young. Do you do a standing start or do you get down? A standing start, because I don't have blocks. If you don't have blocks, you just fall over and land on your face, and then you're a man on your face. When we were down in University of Bath, Polly McGregorne, who's the sport scientist we were with, she offered Michelle blocks. She had them there. Maybe that was the thing that would have made all the difference myself. I don't suggest that. Listen, we've taken the Mick out of Michelle a lot, but I've got to say I was down there. I felt slightly embarrassed that I wasn't doing it myself, but for the injury, I knew I wouldn't be able to fake injury. It was a really injury. When you get to my age, when you injure yourself, the first thing that goes into your mind is not how that hurts, it's just, that's going to take like six months to heal, whereas when you've got kids and you see them injure themselves, they heal like Wolverine. It's incredible, isn't it? Wounds just go on. In front of you, whereas I get a paper cut and I can't hold a pen for a week. Hang on, I want to ask another question to Greg, because your part of your question was about running like a gunk, was a granny like a quadruped. So does that mean that in your drive, when you're doing your little sprints, you've also tried doing it on all fours. I've never tried on all fours, but having now heard about the Japanese man, quite tempted. New hobby. It is a funny response that, because I was thinking about, I was overthinking this from an evolutionary biology perspective. Running on all fours is a really dark idea for humans, because you need all sorts of adaptations to run on all fours, not just like going on all fours and learning how to do it. I mean, we're now evolved to not run on all fours. But is it also the fact that monkeys have tails? So they've got balance, they've got better control over there. It's the whole package, though, because our hips are designed so that we're bipedal and also the position of our skulls and our spines. The fact that the hole that connects your spine to your skull is called the Pharremen Magnum, which is Latin for big hole. But it's in a very specific position, designed so that when we stand up, our heads are at this level and face forwards. If you look at a chimpanzee's Pharremen Magnum, it's at a different angle. And our hands, our hands are really crap at running on the ground. But that, I mean, that's the thing, isn't it? But when we look at archaeologically or just in terms of historical shoes and footwear, and you look up the human race in terms of the adaptation of clothing and so on, which, we know, goes back to the stone age. But people used to run on bare feet and they're presumably their feet just got really tough and really used to it and maybe the same with hands, I don't know. Well, maybe, but there's a very interesting thing about the history of footwear and running bare feet, which I'll tell you briefly now, before this turns into a lecture. Until the advent of modern running shoes, mostly by Nike in the 1970s, people used to run toe heel and now almost everyone runs heel toe. And the basic physics of this is really bad, because if you land with your heel first, then you've got a straight line of impact, which goes straight up all the way up your leg to your hip. Whereas if you run toe heel first, then all of that impact is taken off by the sort of curvature of landing with your toes first. Just a much better way to run. Well, that's our sprinters run. So sprinters their heel never hits the ground. So you do 100 meters in your heel and no point ever contacts really with the ground. You are landing on the middle and front of the foot and you're springing off and you're powering through. Actually, this reminds me because there was something quite interesting that Peter Wayne told us, which is that everyone when your sprinting spends about the same amount of time in the air. But the people who move forwards faster are actually the ones who spend less time with their foot in contact with the ground. So it's about short contact time. That's really what running fast is all about. Yes, it's about the turnover then. So I was understanding that you say in bolt his advantage is he's very, very tall and very lengthy in flakes. That's what Polly McGregor was saying that basically is the fact that he can turn his legs at the same rate as shorter sprinters, but he's six inches taller than them means that every pace is longer. It just seems like such a basic. It's a fact of a cheating really. We're not accusing of using a lot of this programme was about whether someone could run faster than the new saying, but we kind of focused in quite a lot on the male athletes there. But actually, I had a chat with Steve Hake about different ways to predict what's going to happen in the future and he told me something quite interesting about a prediction from the data about female athletes. There's two ways of looking at how fast someone might be able to run. The first way is to look at it from a physiological point of view and the second way is to look at previous data, extrapolate forwards and make some bold claims. And there have been some really bold claims in the past. So, you know, Tatum and Whippen Ward, what they did is they took just world record data going back to the early 1900s and then put straight lines through them and projected forwards and then started to make claims with their linear fits that before too long women would be running faster than men. And, you know, I don't necessarily disagree that that might one day happen, but in terms of the way they did their analysis, this is a number of things wrong. Firstly, that, you know, when you look at world records, the data only ever goes one way, it always goes up. And the data is really sparse. So, you end up with, you know, 10 points, 12 points over a period of a century. We limit it only on every four years, for instance. Yes. So, if you use a limbic data, you've only got every four years. So, it's very dangerous to start making extrapolations. So, what we did is we looked at every year for a start and we looked at the top 25 runners for men and women right the way back to the 1890s to see how performance changes. So, what you can't do is you can't look at performance as pre-first world war or second world war and compare them to today because performance were very, very different. And after the second war in 1948, following the second Olympics in London, what you find is you find a real jump in performance, particularly in women's sports. That was the advent of sports science, of globalisation. And one of the things that drives performance in sport is the increase in population. So, the larger the population of the world, the more chance you will have of finding an exceptional athlete. And then the second thing is in terms of globalisation, as more of those people have better access to things like the Olympic Games, then the athlete population starts to grow as well. So, as the athlete population starts to grow, performance naturally starts to improve. Now, once you've found all the athletes you're going to find, you've found all the populations, you've done all the sports science you might possibly think of, then you're going to reach some kind of equilibrium where performances always leveling off in all track and field sports. So, reaching limits. And that's true of the 100 metres as much as it is true of the shot put or the discus. If everything's leveling off then, does this mean the Olympics will become a bit boring as we go into the future? If no world records can be broken anymore, what will happen with competitive sports we go forward? Do you know that's a really interesting question. We're starting to see some changes already. So, sport is made up. We make the rules, so we can make whatever rules we want. And what we seem to be seeing is new sports starting to appear. So, for instance, mixed relays, that's a relatively new one. There's all sorts of tactics about mixed relays. So, we can make the rules up. And in a hundred years time, I expect to see that world records in most track and fields will become pretty sparse and we'll have just changed the rules to make new events. Are you suggesting that we bring that school time classic, the Egan Spoon Race, into the Olympics proper? Why not? You know, some sports are pretty ridiculous anyway. So, we have some versions of the Egan Spoon Race already. I am not going to criticise unusual and bizarre sports. No, you're not. Even though there are definitely ones that probably shouldn't be in the Olympics. Well, early on today, actually, I've prepared nothing. I've been mumford was telling me about a new sport that he's invented, Greg. Now, this sport is called Fan Pants. I love it. And as far as I understand it, essentially constitutes, you have to be in a hot country where they've got a fan, like a ceiling fan above the bed or whatever. And essentially, what you do, you have to stop me when I get this wrong. It's good so far. Chuck a pair of pants at the fan. Yeah. Hopefully they attach to the fan, spin around for half a revolution and then fly off in another direction. That's your ultimate goal, really. So, any sort of connection between the fan and the pants is considered a success. I don't understand the scoring system in this game yet to be fully resolved. Can I come in with an underpants question? Are we talking boxes? Briefs? Thong? Maybe there's different levels. Which one? Which is... All of these things need to be instituted into the formal body of Fan Pants. It started in a hotel in India that my wife and I were in mum by a years ago. It was too hot to do anything. And so we were lying on the pants, just going, oh guys, too hot to do anything. And I picked up a pair of her pants and threw them at the ceiling fan. And they just caught and it just went, you know, thwack against the wall and Fan Pants was born. Sports have to begin somewhat. And I'd say the official campaign for Fan Pants Olympics, 2020, for whatever. Let's give it a few years. Yeah. I think it starts here. I think it starts here. We should start a campaign for Fan Pants. I think we should all encourage, you know, we have a social media reach. Greg, you've got a lot of followers on Twitter. I think it's time to bring Fan Pants to a wider audience. Were there other weird sports that people used to play Greg? Through history. Oh yeah, there's loads. There's some wonderful ones. You can be on the spot slightly, but we're doing an episode at the moment on Horror Wisteries, on the history of sports. So the one I really like is Ariel Golf, where you fly over the golf course and you drop a ball out of the plane and then your teammate has to put it. So, wherever it's landed, they've got to then get them out. Obviously, you've come over on a plane going quite fast. So you need to be quite accurate. It's quite a lot of equipment involved in that game. Yeah. And when did they win? Was this suggested? Early 20th century. So you've got the sort of planes 1920s when people have got planes and posh people flying around going, oh, lollipop and what else can we combine with you? Newspaperium. Golf. Lovely. That's quite a fun. In America, there was a terrifying sport, which was polo, but with cars called auto polo. And in semi-op. You knew it could be photographs. It's basically humans being flung from moving building vehicles with no roll cages. I mean, they are just imagined sort of like 1910 style car, sort of big wheels and like sort of a bloke driving it and someone else with a massive polo mallet leaning out the side as the car turns over really dangerous. I think that should be brought back immediately. You wouldn't get that kind of danger with band pants. That's what I'm saying. The car polo thing, Greg, just reminded me of those stories. I don't know whether they're true or not, but you're a historian. People walking in front of cars in the early days with a flag to stop them going too fast on the grounds that, why don't we take 20 miles an hour or something? Well, yes, at the early speed limit, I think it was three miles an hour and there would be a man would walk ahead of the whole speed. Yeah, the so a man would walk ahead of the car with a red flag to warn anyone about the oncoming vehicle, which is somewhat redundant. But he'd have to slow down though presumably to keep pace with the three mile an hour limit. I think hills were tricky for him. So if it went up the hill, I think maybe the car would overtake him slowly as it struggled up the hill. But obviously when you get the invention of steam trains, which are the first speed vehicle, there is a real pushback against this from a scientific point of view, people are terrified that the human brain will just go to jelly if you are traveling at the terrifying speed of 40 miles an hour or whatever. There's all sorts of protesting and worry about the fact that the humans just aren't meant to go that fast and then someone was like, what if you get in a horse? Did they not go the same speed? I think ultimately they probably do. But there was this big pushback against it until I think a lot of people realise a lot of money has been made and trains. It sounds like it's quite easy to laugh at that kind of stuff, but I guess at that point in time until someone has tried it, until someone has proved that your brain doesn't turn into too much. Ultimately you have to be quite a pioneer to be willing to put yourself in that situation. Yeah, I mean if you think about it in the sort of I think the 1630s, there was a man called Hassan Celebi in Turkey who fired himself out of a rocket to celebrate the daughter of the Ottoman Sultan who was her birthday and so he sort of loaded himself into sort of metal rocket and then put gum powder sort of fireworks around the outside of it and then fired himself into the boss' risk I think and survived but he presumably went quite fast. I don't know. I don't know. Royal Burst these days. Do they? Disappointed. I don't understand. I parachute I believe. Oh, I think I think he sort of because essentially it was a metal tube from which he was you know those sort of circus cannons. You know when a man gets fired out of a cannon or a woman out of a cannon. I think he sort of loaded himself into a top of a rocket, but he was ostensibly out of it. His legs were in and then there were kind of fireworks on the bottom. So gum powder power and it just propelled him up in a sort of parabolic arc over the boss risk presumably and then once he was sort of high enough and thought this has gone all right. I think he probably just sort of squeezed out of it like pilot leaping out of a space. I know what I want from my next birthday that's that. We were saying. We were saying, Ray and the Red Blessed Day, when you do exactly that. But I do, I'm really interested in this idea of the limitations that we place on ourselves which you know we're talking about them being three miles an hour or 30 miles an hour or whatever it is. But this thing that Steve Hague said which is that according to some calculations we will never get faster than 9.41 seconds which is what? 1700s of a second faster than you say in bolts record at the moment. Why is that? Because obviously the biology of a human being is relatively standard although we come in different shapes and sizes. There must come a point surely with someone freakishly tall, taller still you know with modern diets and all that or even with sort of rocky four style gene doping where you get sort of Russian superstar who's bred for it. There must be someone taller who can still do the Usain Bolt recycling of legs and will still come in you know rattling around 9.02. But I think the argument though is that the incremental difference they'll be able to make while still being sort of capable of functioning like a normal human being is going to get incrementally smaller and smaller and smaller. I mean it's actually you've got a curve that's flattening off. And and Polymer Griggan our bath sports scientist that came out wrong. It's not it's not it makes it sound like she's her sport is or racing down hill in a bathtub which. Polymer Griggan our sports scientist from the university at bar said that she thought that these records will continually be broken. I just think I mean that well basically now we're waiting for someone to go sub nine five right. Yeah that's gonna be amazing. But also are we waiting for sort of gene doping so they may come a point in just I think I think they should split off the Olympics. I think they should have one normal Olympics where no one's allowed to use them big and then they should have a super Olympics where you can genetically breed people. Do you know what? And give them all of the drugs. I want rocky four is a real life thing that's all I care about. I was a big red dwarf fan when I was growing up in the red dwarf book they actually have the genetically engineered life form Olympics and where Scotland engineer a man to be 22 feet wide and eight feet tall and they still don't manage to make it out out of the qualifiers. That's what we want. All right I think it's time then for our Curio of the Week. Wait wait wait wait we're not using that music this week we have got a new jingle this was sent Curio of the Week jingle by Ian Smith from Edinburgh. I'm just going to play your little snippet first Adam see what you think here we go. Curio of the first impressions. I like it's got a sort of Indy 90s filter right up my street bit gothy you know bit bit sort of Scottish folk. Right. Let's play on. What come on Ian Smith. I like it. It's Rutherford and Fry. It's not Rutherford or Fry. You know what though. Fry Curio that isn't a thing that's got a ring to it much more than Rutherford. I mean it's too many. What's your mouth doing it too much going on. No I'm vetoing that. There isn't a fry Curio. We are one nation Curios. Can I send Ian Smith a badge? He can have a badge but he's not Curio of the Week on Vito. Okay fine no Curio of the Week this week. Right that's almost time up for us for this episode. We just got to say a huge thanks to Greg Jenner our resident historian who was in the first series and is now in the 11th series. You have to come back for the 21st now. Or the 100th of the 11th. Oh gosh. We can decide on the map. I can't have a phone before then. Anyway if you have a question send it to Curios cases at BBC.co.uk and we will see you next week. This is the BBC. Hello I'm Antonio Quirk and I'm the presenter of the film program on Radio 4. I'm Caitlin Benedict and I'm Antonio's lovable idiot sidekick. I'm on Radio 4 every Thursday afternoon talking to the most interesting people working in and around film. And then afterwards there's always something exclusive to the podcast. Anything from the work of Derek Jarman to the overwhelming cultural importance of Mama Mia and its sequels. Take a listen on Radio 4 on the BBC Radio website and all year round as a podcast.
