Hello, this is the podcast version of the curious cases of Drs. Rutherford and Fry. Drs. Isn't it in the title? It is. I'm Dr. It's just curious case of Brother Finn and Fry. Oh is it? Yeah, but we are doctors with a Finn and Fry. What are you a doctor of? Everything. I think I can actually claim to be a doctor of everything because mathematics is the language of the universe. And these are the types of issues we're going to have to deal with, dear listener. And what's Dr. Fry and we're going to do in this episode? This episode is about the curious case of the Scarlet Mark. That's being... ...gingers. That's you. That's you. It is. I am cursed with the mark of the Scarlet Jean. No, no, no, no, no, it's not cursed. It's a stop the ear. Blessed. Your hair is an astonishing beacon of awesomeness. I do take quite a lot of care of my hair. It's true. And the idea behind this series is that you dear listener send us in your queries, the things that have been puzzling you for years, things that you observe that have been slightly annoying you. And we, Dr. Fry, Dr. Rutherford, we will try to find out the scientific answer to your curious cases. Indeed. So on with the show. Today's study is close to my own heart, dear listener. And more importantly, your head. And I do hope dear to you as well, Adam, because as a geneticist, the curious case of the Scarlet Mark is one with DNA at its core. Indeed, we have pledged to investigate your everyday questions using the power of science. And recently, we received the following correspondence from a Dr. Sheena Kruchschenk in Manchester. My eldest son is ginger, but I am blonde, and my husband Brunette. So we're constantly asked where the red came from. Further, people do say the ginger gene is dying out, but with the apparent ability to skip generations, as in our case, how good is that maths, or is it just anecdotal? Yes, well, we'll come to the ginger gene in good time and to the question of the extinction of your kind. But, Hannah, it must be noted that you do bear the Scarlet Mark like a fiery beacon. Yes. Thanks. I think I am what is commonly referred to as a massive ginger. Yes, would you like to share some of your experiences with us? Yes, I would, actually, my husband, your friend. Often, you wander around forgetting how you look to the outside world, but then every now and then, someone will come and remind you that you're different. Take, for instance, this example. It was a perfectly normal day. The sun was shining. I was walking down the road, minding my own business. Just moved to London with full of the joys of spring, when across the road from me, a young man coming towards me shouted out, Oi, ginger minga! Yes, that's appalling. Does this happen often? Well, probably not so much now that I'm a bit older, but I reckon about once a week when I was in my early 20s. Well, it is appalling and deplorable, but where does this prejudice come from? Now, to solve this case, we need some evidence. So I turn to Red-headed cultural historian Professor Kate Williams, from the University of Reading. Through history, Red-heads have stood out, and they've been mistrusted. Shakespeare calls it the dissembling colour. So Red-heads are often seen as liars, like Judas, who sold Christ down the river, so they're not a safe person for a friend. And Judas, is he a Red-head in the Bible? Judas isn't a Red-head in the Bible, but he's constantly represented as Red-head. So Red-head almost comes to stand for something that's mean, that's cool, that's also sometimes slightly witchcrafty. When you look at the Malias Maleficurum, the witch finders' handbook, the original said, you can't trust women with beautiful hair, so witches are often women with beautiful hair. That's all it said in the original. When it was translated in the early 20th century, the translator, he put in reference to Red-head witches. So Red-heads are often seen as people you simply shouldn't have around. And how far does that go back? We've got records of the ancient Greeks, the Thracians who they saw as a lesser state, they would be characterised as Red-head and discriminated against. So it goes back right as far as we can see about people talking about representations, is that Red-head is something that's hated, it's something that's mistrusted. And I think the only really reason we can think of for that is that it is the colour of blood. The really is life that bad for you? Well, I certainly wouldn't suggest it was anything like suffering from racism, but there's other examples of cryos, for instance, one of the world's biggest sperm banks, that banned ginger donations a few years ago, because they said it was unfashionable. There was, I think there was a lack of demand to be fair, but there was a big outcry about this, and they have now allowed ginger men to donate their sperm once again. But it has to be said, it's a lot cheaper to buy. I am sorry for your troubles, but we must get back to the case in hand. Dr. Crookshank wishes to understand her son's condition, shall we call it? I prefer to think of us as more biologically unique. So what is it that makes us different? Well, the story begins with what you could safely class as a pretty niche hobby that sprang up at the end of the 19th century. People started to collect mice with different coat colours. It was referred to as the mouse fancy, and originally this was very big in China and Asia. This is Jonathan Reese. He's a dermatologist from the University of Edinburgh, and he's one of the scientists who discovered the ginger gene. Yes, I know dermatologist study skin will come to that bit later. But first, back to those fancy mice with their coats of many colours. Through the 20th century, people began to be interested in why those mice had different coat colours. And in the early 1990s, a group in America, Roger Cohn and colleagues identified a gene that seemed to be important in determining whether mice had a yellow coat colour or whether they had a black coat colour. And for reasons we still don't fully understand, yellow in mice is probably the same thing as red in humans. So that gave us a clue. So they set out to investigate this gene in humans. Could a simple change in the code be responsible for some people inheriting their gloriously fiery locks? But Jonathan's experiment didn't turn out quite as they'd expected. The experiment was collect a bunch of 20 to 30 people with bright red hair, collect a bunch of 20 to 30 people with dark hair, sequence the gene in both groups. And in one sense, what we were expecting to find was that there would be a single change, and that would be sort of easy and it's a nice simple story. The problem was they didn't find just one change. They found so many different variations in the code they thought their machinery had broken. Yes, well, genetics is really simple, but this in a nutshell is how it works. We all have a gene called MC1R. What Jonathan Reeson's colleagues discovered was that red heads have one of a handful of different types of this gene, almost like flavors. In our bodies, MC1R is involved in pigmentation, how we are coloured. And it all works via a molecule called melanin. So we have two types of melanin. We have a sort of brown melanin and we have a sort of red or yellow melanin. This gene codes for a receptor, a protein, it's almost like a little volume control that alters the ratio of the two melanins. So if you have bright red hair, you tend to produce more of the red melanin. Whereas if you have very dark hair, you tend to produce the brown or black melanin. So by turning the volume control up and down to change the ratio of brown and red melanin, this produces all of the glorious shades of red hair that we see from rich orban to strawberry blondes. Elementary, Dr. Rutherford, but hang on, that doesn't answer Sheena's question because she's a blond and her husband is a brunette. So how come they had a ginger baby? Well, we all have two copies of each gene, one from my mother and one from my father. And the red version of the MC1R gene is recessive, meaning that you need two copies to be a red head. If you only have one, you are merely a carrier. So by deduction, my dear Dr. Fry, Sheena and her husband must both be carriers and each one of them has passed down their one ginger copy, meaning their son has inherited two and thus he is a red head. But Sheena, son, I think you should embrace your red hair because there have been other times in history when red hair has been glorious too. Take Queen Elizabeth I, for example, after the ginger king Henry VIII had his marriage to Anne and old and just before he had her head chopped off. Their daughter Elizabeth was branded illegitimate but she used her flame coloured hair as a secret weapon when she took the throne. Elizabeth I made every effort to seem as ginger as possible because what she was doing was saying, I am just like my father Henry VIII, as opposed to her dark swore the mother Anne Bolin. It was Henry VIII, she was evoking saying, I am the rightful tutor. So she made her face very white with red paint and she wore these incredible bright red wigs and she really inspired her gorgeous to go red too. So you have men using root barb juice and sulfuric acid to make their beards red or to please the queen. So there is this fantastic time in which red hair is wonderful in the flowering of the Tudor period. I think perhaps the greatest time for gingers in history. That brings us nicely onto the subject of skin because red hair is often accompanied by what I like to call ginger skin. Palin interesting I think is what we refer to it as. Oh I'd say translucent with a hint of blue. Well interestingly the same melanin that produces the red colour in your hair also pigments your skin and if you don't have this type of melanin in your skin it's simply not as good at filtering out ultraviolet light which means that you are I presume prone to sunburn. Hey I can wear fact to 15 be sat in the shade and still get burnt from the reflection of the sun of the sun. I'm sorry I shouldn't laugh but it's not all bad news for gingers skin. I asked dermatologist Jonathan Reese whether there are any advantages to my pale tones. Yeah we think so because if you sort of run the evolutionary clock back say 30,000 years ago probably most people had dark skin and much of humanity lived in Africa. As humans moved out of Africa there seemed to be some advantage in having paler skin so this was actually selected for and we think the reason for that is that you do need some degree of ultraviolet radiation to synthesise vitamin D in your skin. Yes I'll definitely give you that it's the pale skin that's the advantage not necessary the red hair but as Gina pointed out earlier she mentioned that it wasn't that long ago that newspapers were full of headlines spelling doom for the red head. Gengers face extinction due to climate change. Scientists warn red heads could become extinct in Scotland as the country warms up because of climate change. Well that sounds pretty ominous so the argument goes if the climate is warming up then pale skin becomes less of an advantage and so red heads are in danger of extinction. Yes those headlines were not in fact from the scientific paper but a press release from a DNA testing company. That's a relief. Yes the only way we worked out that ginger genes could be exterminated is if every red head is murdered and every carrier too or alternatively all red heads would have to stop having sex forever for some incomprehensible reason and as it's a recessive trait there will always be carriers of the ginger gene so they will have to stop having sex too. I quite like to call those people secret genders but if you don't have a DNA test in get to hand how can you tell if you're a secret ginger? Well there is something that I've been meaning to tell you you'll notice something slightly different about my appearance today. Do I? Yes are you beardy? Yes I haven't shaved for two weeks just for you. That's two weeks when. Alright don't undermine my masculinity it anymore. Come on have a look because I'm as you say I'm quite swarthy. Yeah. Dark. Come close. Must I? Yes you must and bring a torch as well. Hang on what am I looking for? Well what do you think? If you got some ginger on your beard. Look down here. Oh gosh you have. It's true I always knew that I had a bit of ginger in my beard when I let it grow and then I did have a DNA test. Yeah. Last year and it's right there. I'm a carrier. So does that mean that people with ginger beards have a much higher chance of having ginger babies? Yes they do. So if a person with a ginger beard has a baby with someone like you for example then 50-50. Exactly each child has a 50-50 chance of being a redhead. So I think we can say conclusion beware or you ginger bullies you might just end up having ginger babies. Dr. Fry I think we can clearly say Tashina Crookshank, Case Solved. Thank you for listening to the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. This program was made in collaboration with BBC Future and produced by our excellent producer Michelle Marty. She's pretty good. She knows she's got some skills. She's got super skills. Look at that. Look at her fingers poised on the sliders there. Look at that. I don't even know what all those sliders do. No I don't think she does to be honest. It's quite a lot of them. If you dear listener have your own curious case that you would like us to investigate then you can email us at curiouscases at bbc.co.uk. And if you go to bbc.com forward slash future there will be posting videos and other things to do with the show. Thanks for listening.
