I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello, Curios. Last part of the series today. This sounds all like, oh, I'm doing like a children's kind of reading sessions, isn't it? A little bit creepy. Gather around. Gather around. I'm going to read to your children. I don't like it. Can you do it properly, please? Hello, Curios. No, you're still doing it. That's weird as well. You sound like a child catcher. Hello, Curios. This is our last episode of the current series. And we want to say a huge thank you to all of you who sent in questions during this series. But of course, if you have been thinking, you know what, I'm really just always wondered that one thing. You can still send them in because believe it or not, we've got another series coming. It's true. They've given us a series nine. So send it into Curios cases at bbc.co.uk. Now in this episode, Hannah got all confused because the question is inspired by a James Bond film specifically gold finger. I don't think confused is the right word actually. I've never seen the film. You were definitely confused because you literally had no idea what happens in gold finger. One of the most popular films of all time. It's not integral to enjoying this episode. Just like to say that to anyone who like me has better things to do with their time than watch slightly crappy old films. Anyway, we'll discuss that later. Now, listeners, I want you to imagine a really over elaborate title sequence filled with guns and oddly painted dancing women. Ah, Dr. Fry, I've been expecting you. Hang on, that's not our theme, Joe. Impressive sleuthing skills there, my curious friend. Today we're tackling this Bond inspired inquiry sent into Curios cases at bbc.co.uk by Eddie Griffith from Burbage in Leicestershire. Here are your instructions. Okay. The other day I was watching the James Bond film gold finger. He boasts that his laser is powerful enough to project a spot on the moon. Is it actually possible and how powerful would such a laser need to be? Oh, fingers. Pretty good. Beware of his heart of gold. This heart is cold. Okay, basic plot for the three people who haven't actually seen this film. Me, I'm one of those people. Right. Or it gold finger is a generic Megalamaniac baddie who is really into gold and plans to detonate a dirty bomb inside Fort Knox, thus making his own gold reserves more valuable. James Bond via some standard misogyny is onto this plan, but has been kidnapped by stereotyped Asian henchmen or job and has taken to gold finger's secret layer. Good evening, 007. Bond is strapped to a big gold table with the very 60s looking sci-fi machine bearing down upon him. You are looking at an industrial laser which emits an extraordinary light not to be found in nature. It can project a spot on the moon or at closer range cut through solid metal. I will show you. At which point gold finger turns on his big nositol phallic laser and sends a scorching hole through the table between Bond's legs heading towards his crown jewels. Do you expect me to talk? No, Mr Bond, I expect you to die. Goodness, the sense of drama there is almost unbearable. But okay, the question here was not can a laser fry someone's ghoulies. It's can we spot a laser that's been fired at the moon? Right then, as part of my mission, I'm going to infiltrate one of the top secret and most powerful lasers in the world. It's not really secret though, is it? You found the email address from their website. Maybe, it's the Gemini Super Intense laser in Didcotney, Oxford, but it is one of the most powerful lasers in the world. How's inside the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory? Hello, isn't that the doctor Adam Rutherford Appleton Laboratory? Ernest Rutherford will ask no relation. Okay, but they're going to let you loose with one of the world's most powerful lasers. Yes, it is possible that they're not familiar with my previous work. I'm Kerry Brenner, I'm a plasma physicist. I've been working with the most powerful lasers in the world. Which is exactly... One of which is right here. Right here. So we're studying next to this big sort of white box with a lid open and there's on sort of standard laser board with lots of lenses and it's really cool and I'm a bit over excited, but while we're standing next to this incredible machine, can you just Kerry tell us what a laser actually is? A laser is a highly engineered beam of light. It actually fires in a pulse mode, so it's not a continuous wave laser like a laser pointer. It's actually when you press fire that it sends a pulse of energy through and that can be controlled, that steves over there by the control desk right there controlling when that pulse comes. But when it does fire, we can deliver that light in a very short period of time so that we can make its power very, very high and it can be focused out of very small spots. Dressed like this and in this room, do you ever get the sense that you are part of a James Bond film because this is all very evil baddie there? It's definitely extreme engineering. It's extreme engineering, these are street extreme lasers. These are things that only use by a few people around the world. I don't think you're taking this very seriously, Dr. Rutherford and I am a little bit concerned about that siren. Yeah, you heard that too. Look, I am, I'm being deadly serious here, we'll be back to firing the most powerful laser in the world in just a minute. Okay, can you stop saying that? And also, let's get back to the question at hand. Could we spot a laser on the moon? I think that we need to apply some high powered mathematics here. Exactly how powerful would this laser need to be to reach the moon? So I called in everyone's favourite physicist, Dr. Andrew Ponson. With a little bit of advance warning that this might be coming, I sat downstairs and did some scribbly calculations. Now, I wouldn't stake my entire career on these calculations but they're my best shot at it in the half an hour I had. So would you like to do? Good caveat, yes, I would. Okay, I reckon if you just wanted to create a dot on the moon's surface, you would need a laser with a power of about 200 megawatts. Okay, how does that compare to say a pointy laser that you get when you're giving a lecture? Oh gosh, those those are really, really low powered. I think those are measured in milliwatts, a thousandth of a watt. And just to put this in some perspective, you know, a watt of things you talk about with light bulbs and with the energy-saving ones these days, typically a good light bulb is sort of 10 watts. And this laser needs to be millions of times stronger. Yeah, so something like 20 million times stronger than your average energy-saving light bulb. So a 200 megawatt laser, that is a pretty big laser. At least and once you add in extra effects to compensate for things like diffraction in the atmosphere, which spreads the light out, you could be looking at a giga was. Great Scott. It's basically equivalent to the power of a nuclear generator. And the laser would probably need to be about 15 meters across. But Dr. Fry, where could be fine such a mega powerful laser? Yes, okay. I think I know where you're going with this. So that siren, should I be concerned about that? It means that there is a hazard entering the room and the little click you just heard was one of the shutters opening. Okay, you're going to do a demo for us. Steve, your Gamer Assistant is on the control deck there. So this is going to generate a very loud noise. Now we are going to have to turn down the mics for this section so that we don't blow people's speakers and ears. So it may not sound as overwhelmingly exciting as it does for us in the space. But let's fire it up. Here we go. Oh my mother of that was really loud. That was like a gunshot. No, yeah, that was a good one. I really felt that my ears then. Amazing. Now look, we have to go back to the question itself. So the question is about firing a laser at the moon and the power required to get a laser to shoot at the moon. This presumably would do the job? Well, do you know what is actually I would say too powerful. The power is about half a petawatt. Tenth the power of, tens the power of 15 watts. Just as a comparison, the output power of the UK National Grid is only a few tens of gigawatts. So it's tens of thousands of times. Thousands of times more powerful than the entire output of the National Grid at that moment. Yeah, in that fraction of a trillionth of a second. When laser light is so powerful, just getting through the Earth's atmosphere is going to be a problem for you because the laser is going to be burning the air up as it goes through. It would burn, how do you burn it in the atmosphere? It would just burn a filament as it goes through. As it travels through, the intensity of the light is so much that it just turns the air into a plasma. So we set fire to the sky. It would definitely make a nice channel of lightning. I mean, that's what lightning is. It's a channel of plasma. Do you ever stand next to this and just put your hands in the air and shout unlimited power? You do, don't you? It's pretty awesome saying that yeah, for my day job, I get to press fire on the most powerful laser in the world. You know, I don't think she was impressed with your line of questioning. Oh come on, it's what everyone was thinking. No, everyone was thinking that after all that hype, the laser didn't sound that loud. It was super loud. I have to point out that we did have to dial the laser power down so that we can actually enter the room without getting obliterated. And even then, we had to turn down the volume by loads so that our studio manager didn't have a connection. So all in all, it was a tiny fraction of this laser's sky scorching power. All right, if you say so. I've been on my own secret mission to actually answer our listeners question. And in the process, I have uncovered a physicist who really does fire lasers at the moon. He's called Tom Murphy and he's from the University of California in San Diego. He performs what's called laser ranging experiments. Now who's the one getting all super baddy? Well, this is totally real. He uses a gigawatt laser that's housed on top of the mountain in New Mexico and shoots it mirrors left on the moon by three Apollo missions and two Soviet rovers. And we can see the beam from the Earth. Well, by the time the laser light reaches its destination, it's so dim that they need a telescope to see it. And they're using this laser in an evil plan to take over the world. Strangely, no. Unlike Goldfinger, Tom said he isn't using his moon laser for crime, but for science. That's true. And I'm not often compared to Goldfinger. But yes, we're using this for a scientific purpose. We are trying to test whether general relativity is correctly describing the lunar orbit as we find it. And for that, you need to measure how far away the moon is. So it's a pretty simple idea that we send short pulses of light that travel to the reflectors on the moon that the astronauts left. The light pulses return to the Earth and we just simply time how long it takes for the round trip and then use the speed of light to convert that to a distance. So is the moon fixed then or is it moving further away from us? It is slowly migrating away as a consequence of tidal dissipation. So it moves about 3.8 centimeters per year on average farther from the Earth. But a long time until we have to worry about it sort of flying off in space. Yeah, in fact, the effect diminishes as the moon gets farther away. So this is not a mechanism that would ever allow it to escape. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to whether Goldfinger could shoot a laser at the moon, can we say mission accomplished? Yes, but you'd need a laser with the same output as a nuclear power plant to be able to spot it from the Earth. And you'd scorch the sky turning the air into plasma. Which is bad. However, scientists do shoot less powerful lasers at the moon. And this means we can calculate how the distance from the Earth for the moon is changing. And we've discovered that the moon is currently moving away from us by about 4 centimeters per year. But don't fear, unlike James Bond, the moon will never escape. You say you never get to do any cool stuff, but you got to shoot an actual proper, powerful laser, in that I've said. Yeah, really, really special. It is the most powerful laser in the world, one of the most powerful lasers in the world. And they just totally fired it up for us and did some really cool demos. And they fired it in the firing that you heard, which was the little pop. But actually, it was deafening in real life. They fired that at a piece of paper, defocused the beam. And it just sort of torches it in one go. Wait, so there's paper in the middle? They just put a piece of paper somewhere where the beam is going to pass. Because it's all set out on laser tables, which are sort of standard 10 meter by, I don't know, meter tables, metal tables with holes in them and you stick your lasers in them and you put the mirrors in. But when it draws the circle, when you end up with a circle at the end, is there still paper in the middle? Yes, it's like burnt. So it gets white piece of paper and it goes bang and instantaneously there is a round sort of charred bit in the middle. And then when they, when they're doing their actual experiments, they focus it down. So it's all concentrated into like, yeah, a nanometer or something. Have you taken that piece of paper and put it into your shrine to yourself? Your own house. Well, actually, it's on Michelle's desk. She's kept it. That's right. Okay. Yeah. The special Michelle Martin producer. It's trying to add to it. But listen, but listen, I talked to, they don't carry Brenner and her team at Rutherford Appleton. They are not actually trying to fire lasers at the moon nor are they trying to scorch paper or just entertain watching radio and just saying that to speak going. So I did ask her about, about what research they're actually doing there because it is really cool. What are you actually plasma rising in your experience? Also, actually using the Gemini laser, we tend to shoot the laser into a gas, into a high pressure gas. I've got an experiment coming in January where I'm shooting onto goals, titanium, tantalum and platinum. We're actually using that because the laser hits these very high density metals and out the other end comes very, very high energy x-rays. And we're using those to image through nuclear waste barrel simulators. It's the next generation technology for doing 3D imaging of nuclear waste of jet engines of big 3D printed parts that go into planes. Actually, the laser does a couple of jobs in the research that I'm doing. It turns the material into a plasma, so you've got lots of charged particles. But then the laser acts as a supercharged, micro-sized particle accelerator, which is actually a really interesting, innovative area of science that we're going through at the moment. In the last 10 to 12 years or so, these lasers can actually drive really nice quality beams of particles. We've actually got a new era of particle acceleration technology driven by high powered lasers. The interesting, incredible feeling saying that you're generating these plathmas there as hot as the center of the sun. And they're also doing incredible innovative technologies. Stuff that's going to make a real difference the world. It really is super cool and super exciting. And I was, I know, I was being excited about the film references and the film actually had an even like gold finger that much. She even carries firing pieces of gold. I know, but they create these minuscule plasmas in this tiny space. And that's what they, you know, they, like she said, they're using it effectively as a particle accelerator generated by firing this flipping huge laser at a tiny spot. The scientist is just sometimes unashamedly cool. Unbelievably cool, isn't it? Every day you turn up to work at one of the best physics research labs in the world and fire giant lasers. I know. You know, I have to say actually when I spoke to Tom Murphy in San Diego, I think his job is also just really, really unashamedly cool too. So as mentioned in the programme, he's using his moon laser to try and calculate how far away the moon is. We mentioned briefly in the programme that he plugs all of those calculations in to Einstein's general relativity equations. But why? The distance to the moon is not an interesting number by itself and it's changing all the time. And what's interesting is how it's changing. So how the shape of the moon's orbit compares to that predicted by general relativity? That's really the test. Is the moon following the prescription of general relativity? And is it? So far the answer is yes. I would say at the centimeter level, we understand that the moon is following general relativity and we're trying to push this to millimeter level. So the first step is getting the measurement accuracy, which we've done. And the next step is to get the model to support this at the millimeter level if it can. Why are you testing the theory of general relativity? Are people worried that it might be wrong? I think most physicists are worried that it might be wrong because physics rests on two fundamental pillars. One is general relativity. The other is quantum mechanics as represented by the standard model. And those two are fundamentally incompatible. We don't really have a tested theory for how those two can work together. And general relativity representing gravity is the most poorly tested of those pillars. And so it's suspected that that will eventually show some weakness, some chink in the armor. And eventually give clues to some grand unified theory that we yet to discover. That's right, whether it's a string theory or a quantum gravity or or something new, it could point the way to some interesting new theory. How intriguing, which is of course what Einstein spent his whole life trying to find. Indeed. So it's still worth pursuing. There you go then. In this series, we have done special relativity and general relativity. So never let it be said that we just chat about drafts and know your helium. Right, exactly. We're very serious. That's serious. It's an important theory. A serious science program. And with that, let us go to I can't listen to that without laughing. It's absolutely brilliant. Anyway, last episode was about facial recognition and where the computers were better than biology, including sheep at recognizing human faces. Indeed. And in that episode, we had a section about a work I really struggled to say. Paratolia. Thank you very much. But essentially, it's the phenomenon of seeing faces in random patterns like Jesus on toast and Hitler in houses, that kind of yes. And when we put this out on social media, you curios sent us some absolutely brilliant pictures demonstrating Paratolia. Absolutely hilarious. So here are the runners up for Curio of the Week this week. Paul Kennedy sent us a picture of a toilet looking sad. Alan Brooklyn photographed a worried box. And we had Tracy Thompson. She sliced pepper and half to reveal what looked very much like a tiny leprechaun. Actually, too tiny leprechauns because it was split right down the middle. And of course, there was also Adam Rutherford's Donald Trump pepper. I don't think that you're allowed to win Curio over the week. I know that we never set out explicitly what the rules were, but I'm really sorry on our laptop. I am a little bit disappointed that I didn't claim actual Curio of the week there. But alongside all of those, we're going to give Curio of the week too. Michelle Reeve, who posted a series of photos of peppers doing odd faces, but even better than that, Michelle herself doing impressions of the pepper faces. They are genuinely amazing. You know, I think we should have like a prize for Curio that we should have like a blue Peter badge which have a little like Curio of the week badge. Like a science badge. And then people will like maybe eventually after we've done 10,000 episodes to Curio's who've got Curio of the week badges will see each other in the street and then get a former romantic relationship. Exactly. And we'll have the first Curio's cases marriage. Oh, it would be lovely and we could we could do the ceremony. Exactly. This would be brilliant. I like the way you're thinking long term on this. So aside from that weird fantasy that Hannah just went into, do send us your faces and things photos. We'll put them up online on the website so you can have a look. And of course the email address you probably know it by now is Curious cases at BBC.co.uk. Adam just learnt that last week. But that is, I'm afraid the very last episode of this current series. However, we are back incredibly soon, basically next week, I think. Yeah, it's like the start of February for series nine. And then we're back in the podcast, back in your inbox. And then I think after the next series, we should just have a little lie down. Yeah, except the series after that is going to start in one and I may know ages. We've got ages Michelle's even going to have a holiday. Who said Michelle could have a holiday? Well, she went behind her back, expect a HR. Well, look, anyway, that is it. So special thanks, of course to Michelle Martin, the Curio of the every single series who makes everything happen. But also loads of other people who work on this here at Radio 4 at the BBC, Maria Simon's production coordinator, various studio managers, including today, Donald McDonald, the man who never, ever wears trousers. It's got excellent knees though. He wears shorts. We should clarify that he wears shorts, despite the temperature being almost sub zero. And of course, we need to thank our editor, Deborah Cohen, maybe just one extra small thank you to Michelle Martin. That Michelle Martin, she's very good. Don't forget, if you can be bothered, we don't like doing this bit, but if you can be bothered, you could rate us and subscribe depending on what podcast software you use. Can you do that again, but more hype it? You could rate us and subscribe. You would never podcast provide it. But there's a real reason it's not just feeding our voracious egos. Mostly it is. Mostly that. But also if you rate a subscribe, then you will get an alert when our new series is back in and not miss it, which is obviously extremely important. Exactly. And if you miss it, you miss out. That is all for series eight. See you next time. If you like listening to the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry, then you will like you. Right. I've got to say will. Yeah. I thought it was a probabilistic universe. No, I mean, this case is certain that if you like that, then really you are going to like this much more. And this is the infinite monkey cage. All right. So wherever you are on the universe that you're listening to right now, just have a little search for it and then hit subscribe.
