I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of science. Science. Science. I like it. MUSIC Hello, I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. I'm Dr. Anne Fry. And he's this. Oh, a bit rude of me. A little bit. Jumping in. I didn't know you were coming back, sorry. Did you get it again? No, use it. Gone. And this is the final episode of series seven of the curious cases of her and me. It sure is. And today's question is from one of our mini-curios, the very excellent Milla O'Dear. We talked to you the whole question in full. For the sake of clarity, I think we should hear the whole question. All of the email just for the curious is for our pod listeners. OK. Well, her question says, dear Hannah and Adam, I am Milla. I'm nine years old. I have a question. Oh, no, here it comes. Bum, bum, bum. Why do we dream? Why do we repeat dreams? We should point out that she's actually spent out bum, bum, bum. That wasn't Hannah adding that, it says. There are one, two, three, four. There are seven M's in the final bum. Thank you, Milla. Once I had a dream about me going to a white Persian catch show at my school and I repeated it, but slightly different. P.S., I live in the Panama jungle and we listen to podcasts. Now, I think you've selectively edited some of the things she also says in that email out. Well, OK. So her dad then subsequently emailed Michelle. And he sent her a reply in which he said about his daughter that she can't wait for the new series to be out, how amazing and cool Hannah is. Uh-huh. And how amazing but uncool Adam is. I mean, what? What? This guy's a paleontologist as well, because I've looked him off. Isn't accurate description in this show. Paleontologists, they're on my team. Dude, Mr. Odea, seriously. Look, take your uncoolness and get back in the corner. Yeah. Here's the show. Yeah. MUSIC Today's curious case comes from Milla Odea, who is nine years old and surely almost far flung listener. She lives in the Panama jungle. And her question is, why do we dream and why do we repeat dreams? Actually, you know, if you think about it, dreams are a little bit weird. You're own personal, fantastical story, starring yourself that you get every single night. Tell us one of your most fantastical dreams. I once had a dream that I was a cake in the oven. And when my husband woke me up, I shattered him, because I wasn't going to rise if he did that. Wow. I mean, have you had weird dreams? You were the actual cake, you know. I was the cake. You were the cake. Do you have weird dreams, Adam? Yes. I had a dream recently that Tom Cruise rang me up from his holiday home in the south of France. And he was really bored and I was really busy, so I suspect short-tempered with him. And he was like, I just wanted to hang out and talk. Makes sense. Do you often dream about Hollywood? I had another one, this was last week. In fact, I went mountain biking with Arnold Schwarzenegger. So you're a friend of the stars in your dreams? Yes, in my dreams. Anyway, these nighttime adventures have fascinated scientists and artists throughout history. Did you know that Salvador Dali used to eat sea urchins in dark chocolate sauce, mm, before bedtime, to try and induce vivid dreams to inspire his artwork? I did not know that, but it sounds like it works. It's pretty well, I reckon. Anyway, but we're talking about science here. And there are a smattering of scientists around the world who are trying to peer into our imaginary dream worlds. I do confidently think that I know what everyday people dream about. This is Bill Domhoff, one of the real pioneers of dream research. Now, he has gathered over 20,000 reports from people all over the world in his online dream bank, which people can study to reveal patterns and theories. So what do our collective dreams reveal? Dreams dramatize our concerns. And they often take the worst case scenario. We're going to fail the exam or we're going to forget our lines in the play. Dreams deal not just with our wishes, but with our worries, our fears and our concerns. If I have 100 of your dreams over the space of several weeks or several months, there's going to be various kinds of consistency and various kinds of themes. Some people are going to dream about conflicts with their parents. Other people are going to dream again and again about rivalries with peers. Other people are going to dream about things that happen in the past and are over, but they keep rerunning those things. So amongst all these stories, are there any common themes like teeth falling out or turning up to school in the buff, you know, that type of thing? Well, there's common themes for each person. Beyond that, there's certain common themes that where we all have concerns about. People will often have dreams that there's dangerous males. We call them male strangers. Unknown males are dangerous in dreams to men and women alike. Sometimes people will feel threatened and they will be chased. But beyond that, when we talk about certain common themes like teeth falling out or flying under one's own power or appearing partially dressed or undressed in public, those kinds of dreams do happen to a wide range of people, but they're less than 1% of dreams. So it's just that we remember the weird ones. Like being a cake in the oven. And Tom Cruise being on me day. Yeah, but most of them seem to cover the boring day to day stuff just with a slightly disastrous or surreal version where things just go completely wrong. So what's happening inside our brains when we dream? Well, a key moment in our quest of decodreams came on a cold night in December 1951. Inside the first ever sleep lab, physiologist Eugene Asarencki wired up his eight-year-old son to an old EEG machine he found in the basement of the University of Chicago. During the night, Eugene drank coffee and ate pretzels to try and stay awake as reams of graph paper and traced his sleeping son's brainwaves. At one point, the needles went haywire. The monitor revealed that his son's eyes and brain were highly active. He realized his unmasked have woken up and rushed back into the lab. But when he opened the door, Eugene was surprised to see that he was still asleep. Asarencki named this strange phenomenon rapid eye movement sleep. And later he discovered that when people woke up during REM sleep, they often reported dreaming. Cycles of REM sleep occur every 90 minutes or so lasting up to half an hour. As adults, it accounts for around a quarter of our sleep time. However, we now know that dreams can occur during other stages of sleep too when our brain is much less active. However, although our brain is very active during REM sleep, for the rest of our body, it's quite a different story. Here's Sleep Reception, Mark Blagrow from the University of Swansea. What happens when we fall asleep is that our muscle tone starts to decrease. And then it disappears when you're in REM sleep. And really the only muscles left working are your lungs and your heart. And it may be during sleep that we lose our muscle tone so that when we're having a dream, we don't act out all of these emotional scenes that are occurring in sleep. And the scenes are often evolving movement and walking around and meeting people. And it may be dangerous to act out such scenes when you're asleep. Yeah, good job. You didn't act out going mountain biking with Arnie. Yeah, well, quite because the real problem was that his legs were so musely that he couldn't actually pedal. No one cares about your dream. But we were riding to the forest. No, it was... No! It was very vivid. Anyway, that's what we dream and when we dream, but our question from Meela was about why we dream. And that, Dr. Radford, is a very hot topic because it turns out there is a whole host of different theories. There's a threat simulation theory that people practice overcoming threats in their dreams. So they may fight with lions or they may run away from gangs or they may even have interpersonal threats where they're being say humiliated by somebody else and they need to answer back. That practicing, even if you don't remember it in the morning, is assisting your fitness when awake. There are various memory consolidation theories which hold that during the night, the brain is putting together different memories and in fact the bizzarnis that can occur in dreams is a sign that two things are being brought together by your brain that need to be linked which would normally be separate from each other. There's another theory called a fear reduction theory which holds that we learn lots of fears while we're awake. And during our dreams, we diminish those fears by dreaming of the things we're fearful about but possibly in a different context and that helps you to extinguish or reduce the amount of fear with the possibility that the dream might fail in which case you have a nightmare and everything's really quite frightening. And of course, there is the belief that we can predict the future in our dreams. That's perfectly plausible to me. Well, the evening standard thought so. In the 1970s, they decided to put it to the test. Their science editor invited readers to post their dreams and over the next 15 years, they tried to tie them to real world events. And did they match? No, not at all. No more than you'd expect by pure chance. Anyway, there is a school of thought that says that dreams don't have any evolutionary function at all. Here's Dream Bank founder Bill Dombhof. I think dreams are the accidental byproduct of the evolution of our intellectual abilities over eons of time. And it's that conjunction between an active state of sleep mixed with this large brain capability. It's like we're sitting there with a car at the curb with a motor running ready to go. If we had somewhere to go, if we had a driver, but it's sitting there, it's revving up and it's running through its routine. I think dreams have psychological meaning, but I don't think they have an adaptive function. Now, what that means is that if I have 50 of your dreams, I think I know a lot about what your concerns are in life and what your interests are and who you like and who you don't like. In a net sense, they're not random nonsense. They are psychological portraits. They are fingerprints of your mind. A portrait that says you watch too many action movies. And you eat too much cake. Now, earlier this year, there is a new study that may be able to shine a light on all of this confusion. Sleep scientists at the University of Lózán in Switzerland rigged up subjects with brain monitoring headgear and then let them sleep peacefully before repeatedly waking them up with an alarm and then quizzing them on the last thing that they remembered. This led chief researcher Francesca Ciclari to find a super alert area of the dreaming brain that they call the hot zone. We found that when subjects report a dream or an experience, the brain activity changes in this posterior hot zone, which is actually a region of the brain that encompasses visual areas, but also other areas that are helpful in integrating different sensory experience. And we found that when subjects dreamt, this area was a little bit more awake. And brain activity was much faster, a little bit more like wakefulness, as opposed to when subjects had no experience at all, where we found that brain activity was very slow, similar to deeper stages of sleep. And does that mean what you were looking at was the sort of dream signature in the brain that this is what the brain is doing when we're dreaming? Yes, absolutely. And then we also used this signature to try and predict whether someone was dreaming. So we looked at the brain activity in the posterior hot zone in real time, and we'd try and predict whether based on this brain activity, the subject was dreaming or not. And then we woke up the subject to verify our predation was correct, and we found that it was correct in about 90% of cases. Now, the distinct pass on a brain wave that they discovered, which only happens during dreaming, might just help to solve the mystery of why we dream. So one of the important things from their study is that they found instances for each person of having no consciousness, and other instances where they do have consciousness and are having a dream. And they've managed to show that an air of the brain is involved as a switch. If we can work out what causes the switch to go on and off, we may find a reason for why that conscious experience, the dream is being suddenly turned on or suddenly turned off. And one possibility is that we may have memory processing occurring during the night. And it may be that periodically, we suddenly need to simulate the world in order to run some extra processing that requires conscious experience. And so if we could work out what causes the switch to turn on and off, we may then get information about why dreaming is useful. MUSIC So when it comes to why we dream, Dr. Fry, can we say, case solved? Absolutely not. There are lots of theories from helping us deal with threats. To forming memories or facing our fears. But some researchers think they're just a byproduct of an active sleepy brain. And we'll pop you back in the oven, and I'm off to give Tom Cruise a call. Bye. So there it is, end of series seven, where we recounted our excellent dreams to each other. I enjoyed every moment of yours, Adam. There's so many more details. I believe you, but the Tom Cruise thing actually ruined Tom Cruise films for me for a period of time where I was watching them and just thinking, oh god, he's going to call me up and he's going to be like, hey Adam, what are you doing? And I'd be like, I'm trying to cook dinner for the kids. I mean, I've got to take beta ballet now. I'm kind of busy and he'd be like, oh, I just wanted to talk. I also think your cake dream is quite sweet. And possibly, you need a world-class therapist to try and analyse that too. He knows what it means. But actually, we had a few different people sending questions about dreams. One of whom was Frederico Romano from... Not? No, thank you. Thank you. I was going to say Nantes. I saw it coming. The pronounci... I'm very pleased you got Frederico Romano because normally you'd have 11 goes at that. I did in my brain before it came out. Anyway, she is six months pregnant and she had a question about where the fetuses dream and if they're influenced by the dreams that their mothers have. And we have an extra little clip, especially for you, Curios, to answer that question. That's a very interesting question. Fetuses have far more rapid eye movement sleep than newborn babies. And what happens is the younger people are the more rapid eye movement sleep they have. And so one view is that it's preparing the brain for learning and helping to make the neurons form. And so the fetus has a very large amount of rapid eye movement sleep. Now whether or not the fetus is dreaming, that's very difficult then to say because that comes back to... There's one group of people who have a physiological view of dreaming and they will say, as long as the brain is being stimulated by neural farings from the brain stem. Now their view is, if that's happening, then you will have a dream of whatever your experiences are. So the minimal experiences that the fetus has, when it's awake, maybe it would then have during REM sleep. Now the other view is, no, you need lots of experience of waking life and you need to age before you can have these dreams such as adult humans have. And so really, we don't know, it could be, according to one theory, no, they can't do it in the same way that they can't speak. And another theory would have, it's just a physiological reaction to the brain being stimulated and so they will have an experience during sleep which is similar to their experience when they were awake. I mean, I had another question from Lucy Steens in West Yorkshire who asked, can people control their dreams? Some people quite naturally can control their dreams and in some respects they're quite lucky because they have the ability to realize in a dream that they're dreaming and then they can start to control it, they can do things like flying and they can watch what's happening and they know that they're dreaming and some of these, what's called lucid dreams, can last, you know, for 10 minutes or so. What also can happen is that people can train themselves to have lucid dreams and they do this by one of the methods is to continually remind themselves when they're awake. Some of them wear a bracelet which reminds them to ask the question, am I asleep or am I awake? And the idea is that that questioning carries over into the dream and you start to question yourself and then some of the time you might be able to think, ah, I'm asleep, say because I've seen some strange things happening. Another method that some people have is to wake up early and then they think, right, I'm going to go back into a lucid dream and they fall back to sleep and because their brain's been made so active by this process, they're more likely then to have a lucid dream occurring and one possibility that we've done work on is using the snooze button on an alarm clock and using that to wake you up a short while later so that you can possibly be woken up in the middle of a lucid dream. So that was Mark Blagrow again talking about whether people can control their dreams. I've done that. Have you tried to do that? I have tried to do it. There's an excellent Radio 4 documentary on this with our friend Alice Roberts and our friend Anil Seth on whether you can control lucid dreaming and the answer is yes, if you practice, so he was everything, really. It is quite fun though. I recommend it. I wouldn't say I was necessarily particularly good at it. Well, I would like to be able to control them. Anil Schwarzenegger dream. Of course. Because it was so vivid. And he had these tiny little red hot pants on. Yes, well, that moved into your mind, isn't it? I'm not worried about being a cake. Right there. Right, so we've had cakes, we've had Tom Cruise, we've had Anil Schwarzenegger and his tiny red pants and mussely legs. So, Curios, why don't you send us your dreams? You've got something we want to encourage. Yes, it is. Curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. Or questions to the next series. I think personally I prefer that. I will filter the dreams you deal with the questions. Now, before we finish up this podcast, because the thing is Adam, you go on about your biology, claiming that maths is just people sitting in a room doing their equations. I've never ever said that for the record. But actually, I am doing another project. In which we're genuinely using maths to try and save people's lives. Go on. OK, so we know that there's going to be a pandemic of infectious diseases somewhere around the corner. We don't know when it's going to come, but experts agree that there's one that's going to come. And to prepare ourselves for that kind of disaster, disease modelers use mathematical equations to try and predict how a disease will spread. But here's the key problem. To be able to make that kind of prediction, you need to know how many people will come into contact with each other on a given day. And the only data that we have for that comes from this paper survey that people did about a decade ago. Paper survey, how did they? They said, how many people do you reckon that you met today? And they said, oh, I reckon about 15. Right. I mean, that may not be actually back to the anchor. I'm giving a rock. Methodologically challenging, you'd say. Yeah, yeah, exactly. So here's the thing. We're doing this program for BBC Form that comes out in the new year. And as part of it, we built this smartphone app that you can download on all different platforms. It's called the BBC Pandemic. And what it does is it maps your movements all anonymously. And then we'll ask you a few questions about how many people you've come into contact with to give us much better data to make those disease models much more accurate. And it picks up. You didn't ask you about who you've basically, who you've come into contact with during the course of your normal daily life. Exactly, exactly. And the idea being that this data will genuinely be used by people who are running these kind of epidemic simulations. And genuinely, it will mean that we'll be better prepared for a disaster in the future. And are you asking our curious cases listeners, podcast listeners that they might want to download? You know, maybe I am. Maybe I am. I think it's we need to get 10,000 people to download this app to make it the best they've set that we can to beat the previous one. For the hundreds of thousands of podcast listeners to the curious cases are curious. Yes, indeed. Please do download that Google BBC Pandemic and you will be able to find all the details there. Right. And that's the end of your plug for your BBC television series. It is. Who was that? Who just came into the room? Like super serious TV, Hannah Fry there. I'm sorry. It's a different, different character of mine. Do you know how to say? I'm sorry, curious. That was the curious cases of Rullaford and Fry and some other Dr Fry who popped in to be super serial. I know. I, you do as well though. I've heard inside science. Inside science is a very serious growing up program. Yes, and so is BBC for the pandemic, download and BBC.co.nng once last pandemic. I actually think it's an excellent, excellent idea. I mean, truly an excellent idea and agree. And I'm looking forward to delivering really fungier data by walking past you 87 times in one day. Anyway, curious. That's enough of Hannah's plug. And it's also that's enough from us. Enough from series seven. It is, but we will be back quite early on in the new year, actually, because we're going to have to... Michelle's going to work all over Christmas. She says she says she doesn't get a break. No. We'll be all right there. We'll be swanning around doing whatever it is we do. Indeed. But do send us your questions and your dreams or mostly just your questions. And you don't need to drink. The email address as ever is... Curious cases at BBC.co.uk. And a massive, massive thank you as ever to Michelle who does 92% of the work on this programme. It's true. I do 7.5%. And our studio manager today who's Gail and the other studio managers who've done the other programmes because they're all brilliant and they basically go to extreme lengths to make us look more grown up and less stupid than we actually are. Extensively difficult. Thank you all, Zoe, to you, the gurios, and we will see you in the new year. This is the BBC. I have another in my head. I'm Tim Harford, the presenter of a programme called More or Less. And I have a confession. I've attempted lured, seduced, into the soft embrace of numbers. All around us, politicians, charities, campaigners and corporations know that a sure way to pick up some publicity is to make up an interesting sounding statistic, even if it's nonsense. Four times four is 44. And on More or Less, that makes us sad because we think numbers matter and the truth matters. So we have two jobs to do. Destroy dodgy data with the rightest fury of 10,000 flaming sums, while also celebrating the ways in which honest statistics help us make sense of the world all around us. Politics, business, health and life. The trillion, over here and above sea. So why not check us out? That's More or Less, with me, Tim Harford, on Radio 4, the World Service, and available all year round as a podcast.
