I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello, Curio. That's it, over there. It looks cranky. I can't do it, that's my voice. It's my voice. So welcome to episode four of the Gürtyskays and Rutherford Fry, in which Rutherford has been practically replaced by a croaking bullfrog. Yeah, I'm sorry about this. I lost my voice over the weekend due to a pathetic cold. And now I sound like, well, halfway between Mariella Frostrop and the scary clown from it. You have, though, been swinging gleefully from a little green glass bottle all day. Coffman's. I stress. I know. It just needs to go in a paper bag. And then you complete the mental image. Of me looking like a cramp, out on the street going, and oh, Georgie, one of a loon. You said it, not me. That's fine. Now, we have got a lot of pod extras for you today. Normally, we, I think we've done this calculation before, we, uh, calculated the pod is 22% and 32% better. 22% better. Yeah. This time, though, we are looking at, I would at least 47% minimum, bare minimum. And that's a lower limit. Yeah. Dr. Fry is a mathematician. These numbers are incontestable. I'm pretty sure that's how it works. Yeah. So, uh, we put all the bits at the end, though, so you can avoid our nonsense if you want to. I don't know why any of all we want to avoid. The nonsense is the best. No, I couldn't agree with you more. But anyway, on with the show. A shocking case for us to solve in this episode, Dr. Fry. Quite so, Dr. Radford. This question comes all the way from Guatemala where Jose Chavez Mendes asks. Some years ago, in the dry season, I used to be very susceptible to static electricity. I want to know why the static shocks happen. Tribology. That's the science of tribbles. Mm-hmm. No. And I think that's enough obscure Star Trek references for today. It's the science of what happens when you rub things together a very useful field if you are, for example, trying to reduce friction in engineering. Or possibly if you're investigating balloon-based children's party tricks. Exactly. Well, in order to understand both of these highly important endeavours, here is a brief history of static electricity. The Greek philosopher Talit's discovered in 585 BC that if he rubbed together amber and fur, it would attract feathers and other light objects. In fact, the ancient Greek word for amber is electron, which gave rise to the term electric first used by Francis Bacon to describe materials like amber that held static charge. But my favourite, incredibly morally ambiguous early scientific demonstration of static electricity is called the flying boy experiment. Would you get it through an ethics commission? Possibly not today. Now, this is what happened. Amateur electrical nerd Stephen Gray was the first person to experiment systematically with electrical conduction in the 1720s. At the time, public science demonstrations were all the rage, but he came up with a show stopper. Gray took a young boy from the audience and hoisted him up with silk cords until he was suspended in midair off the ground. He then placed his feet against a rotating sulfur ball which charged him up with static electricity. Electromagnetism scientist Rist Phillips takes up the story. And then Stephen Gray would do a number of different experiments. He would bring a book and he'd get the boy to have sort of wave his hand over the book and the page which would turn without him even needing to touch the page. But the finale to his show was he'd get a member of the audience and they'd turn the lights off. And as the member of the audience went close to touch the boy that looked like this big lightning bolt. And it would have been painful for both of these, but it demonstrated this big sort of static shock. Very cool experiment at the time. Probably not allowed to do that anymore. Yeah, weirdly, I don't think you could get away with that. I don't think so. It wasn't on the curriculum when I was in school anyway. No, quite. Yeah, health and safety police always stopping us from tying up young boys and electrocuting them. He isn't an outrageous. Okay, well, I actually have my own demonstration here which will hopefully explain how static charge works. For me? Yes, it is for you. Don't worry. Should I be concerned? Nothing to worry about. So here I have what's known as a laden jar. It's named after the city of Leiden in Holland where it was invented. And it was used to conduct early experiments in electricity. Yes. It's two metal cups, one inside the other. But in between the cups is a plastic casing that stops the metal from touching each other. And then inside is like a spike sticking out and then a little ball right on the end of that. Yes, I mean, just seeing this equipment, it does make me slightly anxious. Although I am relieved that it doesn't involve stringing me up and then electrocuting me with that. I thought we'd start slow and work our way up to that. Okay. Okay, I also have a little bit of just basic plastic piping. And to create a static charge, the thing I have found work best is actually this leopard print cashmaskar. Which of course you have many of. Of course, several. Now, to create static charge, I'm going to rub this scarf against this pipe here. Now, the universe likes to have equal amounts of positive charge and negative charge all in one place so that everything's really nicely balanced. But you can disrupt that equilibrium by creating friction between the pipe and this scarf. Yeah, that? Oh, yes. Now, both the plastic pipe and the scarf here are interlators which means that they don't conduct electricity. Now, what I'm going to do, I'm going to transfer some of this charge to the laden jar. Oh, yes, I heard that. So you're actually transferring charge into the laden jar, which is storing it? It's storing it, exactly. I feel like no hell this is going to end. Just pop around here, Adam. Oh, what do I have to do? Yes, in the interests of science. All right. Now, all you have to do, it's very simple. If you just place your thumb on the outer cup here, is this going to hurt me? Almost certainly not. Oh, it did hurt me. You are a cruel, cruel co-presenter. I know. Is that made my thumb tingle? Now, it's a little bit tingly, but I wouldn't worry too much, Adam, because I did check beforehand with our electric expert, Reese Phillips, who said it wasn't dangerous at all. Static shocks aren't exactly nice, but can you get really bad static shocks? You can. Nothing that's going to be a health risk for most people, but you might be surprised about the size of the shock in terms of voltages, for example. Our mains voltage is 240 volts. You probably aren't going to get a static shock unless you've built up at least 4,000 volts on your body. Some people have reported getting voltages built up into a static shock up to about 15,000 volts. So orders of magnitude more than you get from a plug? Exactly. But the big difference here is the current. With mains electricity, it's a smaller voltage, but there's pretty much an unlimited amount of charge, and that's what makes it dangerous, because that means that you have a very high current. So it's the current that kills? It's current that kills, yeah. For static shocks, you're looking at currents that are tiny, tiny fractions of amps, sort of much less than 0.0.5 amps, whereas 0.1 amp could kill someone. OK, but when it comes to whether you're likely to get static shocks, does it depend on what you're wearing and the materials around you? That kind of thing. Yeah, so it's all down to something called the Triboelectric Series. So certain materials are more likely to take positive charges, and some materials are more likely to take negative charges. So things like fur and nylon are very good at taking positive charge and holding on to that positive charge. Rubbers and plastics will take negative charge. And then there are some materials in the middle of the series that are much less likely to take any sort of charge. And that's where you'll find things like metals, but also clothing such as cotton, or if you were clothing made out of paper or wood, it's not what we call them when I realise, but those would be materials that don't take very much charge from the Triboelectric Effect. I don't know, I'm sure Lady Gaga's got up the other time. I was just thinking I'm not sure where meat comes into it. OK, so it's a myth about it being just man-made materials that cause static shocks. Apparently so. So wool and fur are some of the worst culprits for building up static charge. Right, and that will explain why we had several listeners contact us to say that they get static shocks from their cats. All part of their evil plans, no doubt. Now, you may notice that your clothes feel more static when they come out of the tumble dryer. Normally, humidity prevents charge from building up, but in the dryer, you've got the combination of lots of friction and dry air, so the charge ends up sticking. And that explains why our questioner, Jose from Guatemala, gets more shocks in the dry season. Exactly. Dry air is an insulator, so it makes it easier for the charge to jump across the gap. If it's wet or humid, the charge will build up, but then leak away through the air. We put out a call before this program for listeners who are prone to get static shocks, and we were inundated with stories, including Carl Vandall, who's a Massachusetts from Essex. Now, he doesn't get static shocks, he gives them out. He's basically a walking vandegraph generator. The worst one I've ever given was to a friend when we'd done a car journey. It was about half-eat at night in Scotland, so it was quite dark. Parked up another friend's house. Both of us reached for something in the middle of the car, and the spark jumped from my hand to his, lit the car up, and then his arms and shoulder down. You're actually a visible spark. Visible spark. What do you think it is? Have you always had this? Yes, I've always had it, and I've never been able to explain it. My wife, whenever we get off an escalator, I am told to ground myself before I'm allowed to touch her or my children. She actually tells this has become such a thing in your life that you are warned not to touch your family, unless you've been grounded. Correct. Really? What he didn't say is that Carl acquired his skills in a freak industrial nuclear accident. Both not true, is it? No, it's not. Right. Well, I asked our actual electromagnetism scientists and modern-day Thor, Reese Phillips. So being able to see a static shock in the dark, it doesn't surprise me because I remember as a kid having some pajamas that when I put my head into the pajamas, I saw static shocks sort of little sparks inside the pajamas from the material. But certain people may feel that they're more susceptible to giving more shocks. The reality is, it's not likely to be something that's different about them. It's much more likely to be to do with the clothes they're wearing and the environment they're in. And possibly to do with their behaviors and their mannerisms, if there's someone that sort of shuffles around in the seat a lot when they drive or if there's someone that has long hair, you've got more chance of building static shock up there because hairs at the top end of that tribiatric series we talked about. So if there's someone who maybe runs their hands with their hair a lot, if he has dry skin, that perhaps will build up more static shocks. So watch out before touching, shuffly people who are the ponchons of nylon. Yeah, and I'll ask them to use fabric softener because that will reduce the chance of their clothing building a static electricity as well. And even what washing detergent you use in your clothes will make a difference. Okay, so I can report that Carl, well he didn't have long hair, he was wearing a very nicely cut suit, it didn't look like polyester. Was he a bit fidgety then? No, but I noticed. So I think we should file Carl under unexplained by science. Seems like the only sense of the conclusion to draw. But even more incredible and prepared to have your mind blown here, evolution has harnessed the power of static in nature. Go on. Here's physicist and honorary curio, Helen Chersky, author of Stormin a T-Cup, the physics of everyday life, and she told me about a neat static trick that bees use in your garden. So it turns out that flying insects tend to be positively charged, which is a lovely thought, all these little bees flying around with their little positive charge, but it gets better because, especially in the case of the bees, because a flower tends to be negatively charged. And the bee can fly close to a flower and they will feel it, they will feel that charge. So bee number one lands on the flower, and the positive and negative charge is neutralised. Meanwhile, it collects all the pollen and buzzes off. And then the long comes bee number two, and it gets to the flower, and this flower doesn't have a negative charge. So the bee consents that, and it doesn't bother. Is that the main determinant of whether a bee will go to a flower? It's not the main determinant. So bees use lots of things. They use colour and the pattern on the flower, but studies have been done showing that they will discriminate between flowers that have been visited more regularly than not, and there's a better one as well. So these flying insects being slightly positive, when they come close to a spider web, the spider web will bend towards them. In exactly the same way that, you know, your hair will move towards your balloon, the spider web will move towards the insect. So if the insect is close enough, the web might well catch it when it wouldn't have done otherwise. You're making a face at me. My face was, that's brilliant. Yeah. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to the question, why do I get static shocks? Can we say case, salt? Yes, friction between you and the ground, your clothes, all the things you touch, builds up charge. You're more susceptible to static shocks if you have long hair, dry skin, or tend to fidget. Or don't use fabric conditioners. Or if you have a particularly mean-spirited so-called colleague. Hello. Okay, hello, Curios. That was yet another example of Hanna-inflicting, low-level pain on me. It did tickle a little bit. I shrieked a little bit. I just, I don't know, you just make it really easy. Well, I think you and Michelle, dude, you know, you can spot, when I discovered today that you'd met up at the weekend in order to... For the sole purpose of plotting a trick to play on you. Yeah, concocting some scheme by which I will end up slightly injured. It was delightful. I wanted to ask you about the B thing, because I think that's really cool. When I was talking to Helen about that, Helen Chersky, I didn't know either of the two stories that she told me, one of which was that bees, well, the insects, are positively charged, and that the pollen is negatively charged. I had no idea about that. But they used to be advantageous. It's just so clever. Yeah, well, clever, exactly. So there's this thing. There was a famous chemist called Leslie Orgel, who worked on the origin of life and things like that. And he had several laws. And the second law, Orgel's second law is evolution is cleverer than you. I mean, still, my mind's totally blown on both of those things. Yeah, that was excellent. I enjoyed that thoroughly. Now, we did say that static was about charge jumping between two objects. We didn't really go into what was carrying that charge. And the reason for that is, it appears to be a bit of a mystery. So I asked Helen Chersky what's going on? It turns out that no one's really sure. The sort of class of explanation is it's electrons, which is an easy explanation because electrons are little, things have them floating around the outside. You can imagine they kind of get lost. And that's how electricity travels down wires. Yeah, it's moving over electrons. However, it seems that in the case of two insulators touching each other, so something like woolen amber, it's not electrons. What it is more likely to be are the rest of the molecule. So if you've got an organic molecule, for example, it's made up of lots of different atoms, the electron actually might stay put. It might be the rest of the ion that jumps across the gap. So it's not entirely sure. And there's a lot of work to do with, perhaps the pressure at which you rub generates heat, which makes some chemistry happen, which splits molecules apart into positive ions and negative ions. So instead of just having one little electron that's your charged particle, you've got a whole fragment of a molecule which now has a negative charge and that might jump across the gap. Or it might be just bigger bits of material several molecules together. No one really knows. And it seems to be really dependent on the situation. What the temperature is, what the pressure is, what the materials are, how rough they are, how hard they're pressed together. This is a sort of great myth-busting here because I'm pretty sure that everyone's taught that it is the transfer of electrons simply by rubbing them off one surface to another. I mean, isn't that just one of the things you're taught at almost like primary school? It is and it is something that I'm sure I've said in answer to questions over the years. It was only when I looked into it a little bit more. The reason I looked into it was because of laundry static because I wanted to know why that was. And I started digging and the literature, the latest reviews say, for metals, it's electrons, everyone's happy. But for everything else, no, not so short. That's in textbooks. That's still in textbooks. It's what I thought was the answer to your list. Yeah. These little flirty electrons running around on over the way. Tarty electrons are going from one material to another. Well, it's not tarty electrons and we don't know what the real reason is, at least for balloons. I will just keep that mental image in my head, though. Now, you met Carl in the programme. Yeah. Electro-Carl, as I think we should now call him. Yeah, Carl came in. And we found Carl because we asked people on Twitter if they were particularly prone to being static-y. And tons of people came back. Tons and tons and tons of people. They think this is like a common affliction that people attract electric charge. Yes, that's right. So here's a couple of them. They were all sent into curious cases at BBC.co.uk. Rachel Holzworth said, At some point, every cat I've ever owned has been enjoying a nice stroke and then shot up across the room as I've shocked it and then does an emoticon unhappy smile face. I love it. It's just great. Although I think they're getting you to tell me, Dick-Old. Well. I'm suspicious of this because cats are so blatantly in control of all situations there in. I wonder whether this has something else going on here. Yeah. Trish-Han from Sydney, Australia, who is a radiographer in Hostel. She says, I get static shocks multiple times a day at work doesn't matter what she's unwearing. If I'm in scrubs or civis, I imagine that means normal clothes. Normal clothes, civilian clothes. No rhyme or reason. Sometimes we work in the dark and I've seen the sparks fly. The fact that she works as a radiographer in a hospital and is generating electricity from us sounds a bit dangerous. Marginally worrying. Trouble. Trouble. Sandy Ward also on the other side of the world although in New Zealand, she's 51 years old and so she gets them static shocks from everywhere, including when she kisses her husband. That's the spark of romance, surely. Very good, don't a fry. Hmm. You know what, though? I think the only time I really noticed them is if I've been on a long car journey, getting them from a car, which I think a lot of people experience. But once again, not sure everything is how it might initially appear. His Reese Phillips again. This is another really common misconception, but it's a very common occurrence. You get out of the car and you get that static shock as you stand up. And a lot of people think that it's because static's built up in the car. They think of the rubber tires and they assume that the car is not grounded and so static's built up in the car. And then it's discharging through you. But it's actually the exact opposite. What's happening is you've been sat in your car, you've been shuffling around in your seat, you've made contact with the pedals, which are quite often made of rubber that's touching your possibly rubber shoes. And so you've built up a whole load of charge on your body, which hasn't gone anywhere. Until you get out of the car and touch the metal frame of your car, at which point all of that charge rushes to the tip of your finger and jumps to the metal frame of the car. And again, that's where you feel the shock. Now you can avoid it. There's a couple of ways you can avoid it. So if you grab on to the metal frame of the car before you stand up, then you've given yourself a connection to the metal before you've moved. And so it'll discharge slowly into the metal. You don't get the pain. The other trick is to touch the car, tap it with a key. If you're assuming it's a metal key that you're holding metal and the car's touching metal, then the spark will be between the key and the car instead of between you and the car. So it's the same discharge as happening, but the spark and therefore the pain is being felt by the key instead of you. Although I'm not sure they really feel pain. Or you could just wear rubber sole shoes and get out of the car without touching anything and never touch anything ever again. Yeah, if you can get out of the car without touching the car at all, that will also help. It's slightly tricky. But it's from a security point of view. I'm not sure how you're going to make that work. Someone also said that they gave their cat electric shocks. Yeah, and just like you might give electric shocks to another person when you go to shake their hands or if you brush past them, if you or the other person or the cat has built up an amount of static charge on their body and the other person is more of a neutral body at the time, then that charge is going to move from one to the other. So you can't tell who the real culprit is. It could be the counter, it could be the owner. Exactly. I mean, you could measure it somehow, but as a general rule, a day to day, you're not going to know who's faulted it. So always blame your friend. Generally some wise advice for life. I think that. Well, yes. So that's one solution from Rhys. And speaking of shocking solutions, he's another email, very unusual methodology from Chris Frohmeyer, who says he's just finishing his astrophysics PhD in Southampton. Good man. He regularly travels to Chile to use a telescope to observe supernovae, you know, because science is wickedly cool. And that's what you get to do if you're a scientist, people. Now, it's very dry because it's in the desert. They have to wear thick rubber boots, and here in his colleagues, offer ever getting static shocks. Now, because Chris is a living legend, he has made a spreadsheet, which logs every time that he gets a static shock. And he has sent it to us. And he's done his email. No, it's a provider, which comment on this severity location and potential reason for the shock. Yeah. So here's one. I mean, basically, basically, Chris is really up to the game of curiose here. He set the bar very high curiose. This is Max, I'm nerd, and I love it. Yeah. So on his chart, he says, second of September, 2016, quote, return, return from coffee machine, shock through laptop, spilt coffee. Unfortunately, the eighth of September was particularly bad, because he had 21 recorded shocks that day. But after he had clearly such a bad day on the eighth of September, on the ninth of September, there's a note in his spreadsheet, which he's written, adopted the Satsuma method. Yes, this confused us slightly. We were unaware in all of our research, which I should say, all of Michelle's research into the programme. What's the Satsuma method actually is, and he said, one night towards the end of the observing run, I had an idea. I think, I think, as to physicists, have a lot of time. A lot of time. He's staring at the sky, which isn't actually doing that much. Anyway, I had an idea. Oranges and Satsuma's have a similar conductivity and capacitance to human skin. Smart. Who knew? Hence, why they can be used on smartphone touch screen. Now, how did you find that out? I didn't know that. He goes on. I mean, really, the level of curio here, the bar is so high, we're expecting some really, really big things from curiose from now on. I think we should have a number one curio award, and right now, he's probably the only contender. Chris Frohmeier is currently the top curio. Anyway, he goes on. For the final few nights, I carried with me a Satsuma from the observatory kitchen. Each of every time I went to Tatsuma, Tatsuma surface, I would hold the Satsuma. I would hold the Satsuma and touch the surface with that first. Very often, Satsuma would take the shock, and I would hear the small crack of the mini-lightning. As you can see from the data, this worked well as the number of shocks noticeably degreased, although one night, I was shocked through the Satsuma. There you go, then. That's an alternative to just carry round a handy Satsuma all time. All time, especially if you're observing observing supernovae in the Chilean high altitude desert. Yeah. Great story. Look, we've got more feedback from the last programme, the Airworms, which was a huge and generated colossal volume of correspondence from Eukaryos. It did. I put up a little video of my coffee machine, playing the hardest buttons button by the white stripes onto Twitter, and as a result, because people are amazing. Gareth Prescott sent in this clip where he plays along to my coffee machine. MUSIC It was a baby boy. So we got him a toy. Right, so we got a problem now, because so far, Chris Frohmeyer, he took the initial lead in the ultimate curio competition, but Gareth Prescott, that was pretty damn good. That was pretty damn good. That's pretty damn good. I think we're going to have to think this competition through more carefully. So there were others as well. Lots of people sent various examples of things in our natural technological environment that sound like songs, including... Someone, Dallas Campbell, actually, a co-presenter of both bars in the past. Oh, yeah, that's right. What did he realise that? He, excellent science presenter by the way, check out his work, he thinks that the Bing Bongs in Geneva Airport sound like how much is that doggy in the window. And we had this one as well, which is very, very simple, but incredibly effective. This is from Chris Chadwick. This is the sound of the electric lighter on his cooker, which sounds remarkably like... I love to boogie by T-Rex. MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC Can we have a three-way tie for this, Gary-O? MUSIC Very good. The first time I heard that, I thought, well, it just sounds like a lighter game. But then when the music comes in, yes, that is exactly what... He's identical. It's already identical. I'm sure that was the original inspiration. OK, now that was the fourth and penultimate in the seventh series of the curious cases. Now, if you have made it all this way to the end of our... How long do I reckon we've been doing with now? 45 minutes. Something like that. If you've made it to the end of this podcast, have to do the thing that we hate doing the absolute most, which is to ask you... MUSIC To rate us with five stars and you subscribe, for if you really, really don't like us at all. See, the problem is, is that last time this happened, and we asked you, and we hasted asking you. But then you... Like gave us... Blimmin' millions of them. Gary-O's, you're absolutely brilliant, and you deserve your new moniker, even though I still prefer your arse. That was the penultimate in the series. Next one coming next week, and it's all about Dream. Dream... Dream... That's enough for us. This is the BBC. MUSIC I have another in my head. I'm Tim Harford, the presenter of a programme called More or Less. And I have a confession. I've been tempted, lured, seduced, into the soft embrace of numbers. MUSIC To fight a new multiply. That all around us, politicians, charities, campaigners and corporations know that a sure way to pick up some publicity is to make up an interesting sounding statistic, even if it's nonsense. MUSIC And on More or Less, that makes us sad, because we think numbers matter, and the truth matters. So we have two jobs to do. Destroy dodgy data with the rightest fury of 10,000 flaming sums, while also celebrating the ways in which honest statistics help us make sense of the world all around us. Politics, business, health and life. MUSIC So why not check us out? That's More or Less, with me, Tim Harford, on Radio 4, the World Service, and available all year round as a podcast. MUSIC
