I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC Hello and welcome to a little preview that we do sometimes. Just a tiny little treat for your ears. Little treat for your ears. So this is the run up to series a million, I think, well, up to now. End. End. What is end? Actually, I think we're on N plus one, right? It is N plus one because then it was the last one. And this we're trailing the new series. So then minus one. We've moved on. T minus. I have really no understanding how equations work. Keep saying letters, Adam. OK. But the point is that we have a new series, but this is the special teaser just for the curus because we love you so much. Indeed, we do. And to demonstrate our love for you, we've even got an episode on love coming up. Yes, we do. It's a Valentine's Day special. I would say a different kind of love to the love that we have for the curus. But love all the same. We'll explore that later. There's much to explore. Also an equal amount to ignore in what Hannah just said. We've also got an episode of Gold. Where does it come from? Always believing in your soul. Thank you. It was a difficult one for us to write that because I struggled with not including Spandale Ballet references in that script. In fact, you didn't struggle that much. Did you? Because the script was lifted with them before I took them out. It took them all out. And an episode on getting a cold. So if you are suffering, then you can find out why. As pretty much everyone is. We've also got an episode on ASMR. ASMR. You don't know what ASMR is. I don't know what it was. Do you know what it is now? Not really. Thought so. After my videos on YouTube, off to get tagged in unintentional ASMR, I think because I've got a very deep voice. Anyway, we've also got episodes. I have no idea how to respond to any of that. It all just went a bit strange in the studio. I think it's just like people listen to it before they go to sleep. It's like soothing. Like crunchy things. Yeah, like listen to it. Yeah, just, you know, don't you watch videos of slime and stuff on Instagram? And what else do we have in this upcoming series, your weirdo wormholes? Like a wormhole. Now, last series, we gave you a little treat at that time. You gave you a little treat. This is like, this is like a little sweet treat before the main meal. Yeah, so it's at first. At the, which is just weird. It's an Amuse Bush. Is one of this. An Amuse Bush. So at the little preview that we did for the last series, N equals X minus one. We talked about some of our favourite bizarre papers that you sort of wonder why on earth that piece of research was done. And the conclusions were just sort of absolutely baffling. And we are mostly actually, I was just overcome with envy that the scientists, that was their real jobs. Yeah, we had some people who gave some Viagra to Hamster to see if it overcame their jet lag. Still didn't really understand the point of that. The other one was whether chickens can recognise beautiful people. What was the conclusion? It was rubber science. Sorry if you're the scientist who did that experiment. So we asked the curious to send in some more examples. Oh boy, did they deliver? Yes, you did. We've gone through this exhaustive list, which ran into the many thousands. Now many of them are too rude to say, but a special mention goes to Dr. Brian J. Field, who is a professor of physics at Farmingdale State College in New York. He provides us with a list. Now we've been through the list of Brian and some of the other curious who sent in papers. And we've picked out our absolute favourites. Would you like to go first? You know what? I will. This is a paper called The Proof of Innocence. So bear in mind that these are real academic papers done by real scientists, with real scientific verified peer reviewed actual proper science. Yeah, oh yeah. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Just this one, Motivators, by the fact that the author, a guy called Demetri Krakow, was clearly very annoyed about being busted. For failing to stop it as stop sign in America. And has come up with essentially this is entire paper. He is coming up with a mathematical proof that he was absolutely, definitely totally and completely innocent of such crime. Let me just read you a couple of sentences from the introduction. Here's the basis of his argument. He says, if we stay not far away from a railroad, watching a train approaching us from far away at a constant speed, we first perceive the train not moving at all when it's really far, but when the train comes closer, it appears to us moving faster and faster. And when it actually passes us, its visual speed is maximized. That is essentially the basis of his mathematical proof. His car slowed down to almost a stop and then accelerated away at the stop sign. And the police officer had no way of determining whether or not he actually stopped from his rescue. He argues that it was mathematically and physically impossible for the copper to know this. He absolutely did. And here's what I particularly like on the archive page. It says the paper was awarded a special prize of $400 that the author did not have to pay to the state of California. You wonder whether it's a chap might be slightly subverting the purity of scientific truth in order to get off a speeding flight. You know what though? I mean, it's persuasive. Let me put it that way. Okay, you do one. So I've picked, well I've picked three out of the various lists you Kuri-O sent into us. A couple of them really, I don't really need to go much further than the title themselves. One of them was, and this is published in the British Medical Journal, very serious medical journal, one of the top medical journals in the world. This came from Chris Hughes and the title of the paper was, Swallowing and its side effects. Now it's a proper academic paper, but I feel like I can summarise the full academic paper without having to read it in depth for the Kuri-Os. If you put a large sword in your throat, one of the potential outcomes is, would you believe it? It's injury. Amazing. Absolutely amazing. It's always good when science studies come up with really counter-inertive results, isn't it? Yeah, another one which I'm just not going to go into further, you can look it up for yourself, it's in the journal Medical Hypothesis. The nature of naval fluff. What is the nature of naval fluff? Mostly lint. Again, these are some short papers that you also tell to me. Well, no, there's short summaries the papers themselves are. Amazingly wordy. Here's one of my favourites. This is a paper that was submitted to Animal Cognition and published I might add by Animal Cognition. A paper is called Pigeons can discriminate good and bad paintings by children. No. Okay, there's two levels to this. Level one must. Quite impressive. Pigeon can do that. Yeah. Turns out they can only do it when it's in full color. I can't do grayscale. Right. But then after you've thought about how impressive that is, I think there's a second name where you're like, what do you mean by a bad painting? Yeah, quite judgmental that. So, turns out these authors got loads of paintings by kids and then sorted them into two of good and bad paintings. I've got a couple of the paintings here for you to look at. Now, top level here and these are all the paintings they consider good. You've got a panda there, very realistic looking fox, a nice whale, bad paintings. I think this whole paper is just an excuse to throw some snark at some kids drawings. This is really judgy. Although that one is quite bad. Are we allowed to even say that a child's painting is bad? That one there looks like someone started painting Santa's sleigh, then decided to change it into a camel and then got a bit frustrated, scrummed it all out. Well, that's the artistic temperament, isn't it? I think that's excellent. I thought I interpreted as Loch Ness. But that's the artist's prerogative, isn't it? You can't tell the viewer what to think. Not according to a pigeon. And there's your pigeon. All right, I've got two more. One is simply a title and I'm just going to have to go over this quite quickly because this is the title that keeps on giving. Complete penile amputation during ritual neonatal circumcision and successful replantation using post-operative leech therapy. There's a lot going on. There's a lot going on. Richard or Isabelle Curry sent that in that email address. So thank you for that, Richard or Isabelle. I don't think that warrants further discussion on this team. No, I need to work it out. So they act some, when you, if you accidentally... I'm cutting this conversation off now. I'm going to give you the paper you can think about this in your own time. Okay, last one, last one. But my last one, and I think this is worth going into in some detail. This was sent in also by Chris Hughes. And it's a paper by Anna Wilkinson et al. published in the journal Current Zoology in 2015. The title is No Evidence of Contagious Yawning in the Redfooted Tortoise. These authors attempted to explain the concept of contagious yawning, which has been hypothesized that I'm quoting from the abstract now, is a fixed action pattern for which the releasing stimulus is the observation of another yaw. We know this happens. Of course. Sometimes when the cat yawns... Just say the word yaw. ...and you begin to feel a bit tired. Well, they looked at the redfooted tortoise Geochelone Carbonaria. How did they make the tortoises yaw and to see if it was conditioned? They just keep them up all night. Well, that's really nice. See, this is why you're a brilliant scientist. You've asked exactly the right question. And Wilkinson et al. have dealt with that very question. So, well spotted. Quote, a demonstrator tortoise was... A demonstrator tortoise. A demonstrator tortoise was conditioned to yaw when presented with a red square shaped stimulus. They trained a tortoise to yaw. Observer tortoises were... Observer tortoises were exposed to three conditions. Observer of conditioned yaw. Okay, watching the trained tortoise do a yaw. Exactly. Non-demonstration control. As in just another tortoise is just there having a nice time. I think so. And stimulus only control. Oh, I don't know what that means. Oh, I know. Did they just show videos? I think they did. Yes. We imagine the number of yaw and three should be observer. I don't know, in each condition. There was no difference between the conditions. Okay. That's the headline result. Equal amounts of yawning at all times. Yeah. Maybe they could tell that the tortoise that was trained to yaw and wasn't really yawning. And we're just opening it's mouth. Yeah. It seems plausible that the tortoises did not view the conditioned yaw as a real yaw. And therefore, final experiment was run using video recorded stimuli. You could have designed this experiment yourself. You're asking all the right questions. Mate, if only my own research was anywhere near as good as this paper. The observer tortoises were presented with three conditions. A real yaw, conditioned yaw and an empty background. So just bear in mind that the empty background, you're asking tortoises to watch nothing. And this is part of the research. I mean, that surely would stimulate a yaw. Again, there was no significant difference between the conditions. We therefore conclude that the red-footed tortoise does not yaw in response to observing a conspecific yaw. This is the kind of thing that makes me proud to be alive. Certainly proud to be a scientist. I mean, just outstanding. And you know what, Curious? If you want more of their outstanding science, then you know where to come because we are back in your ear rolls from next week. Should we give a lot of these people sent us in paper some Curious Badgers? Do we have any left? We haven't got any gold ones left after last year. You gave them out willingly to everyone. Purple though. So that's Chris Hughes, Brian J. Field and Richard Or isabel Curry. You just get one because you couldn't specify whether it was Richard Or isabel. Unless that's your full name. You all get purple Curious Badgers, not gold. But next week, our first episode of the new series is all about gold. Junin de Hémot.
