I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of science. Science. Science. I like it. MUSIC Hello, Curios, a brand new episode of Curious Cases. Slipping its way into your podcast feeds today. This one is all about slippery things. Are you going to send thing? No, I don't think I'll bother that with perfect. OK, on with the show. MUSIC We've got a very slippery customer for you today. Send in to CuriousCases at BBC.co.uk. True, true, Evelyn, age 8, emailed via her dad, Sam. With the question, what is the most slippy thing in the world? And she goes on to suggest it might be ice, or maybe a fish, or oil, or maybe an ice cube in the shape of a fish covered in oil? Just very more than together, why not? I love this question. You know, this is actually something that's very much in my wheelhouse. Is it? I didn't think you were going to say that. Oh, yes. I spent years studying fluid dynamics. And I have dabbled in the slippery arts, because there is an entire discipline of science devoted to slipperyness. People who study what stops things from slipping, friction, but also what helps things to slip lubricants. Now, I didn't know that at all. What is the name of this discipline? Is it lubology, libation, fructology? And now we see the biologist process here, just if you don't have a name for something, make some stuff up. No, actually it has a real word. It's called tribology. And that's from the Greek trivi, which means to rub. Well, that makes sense because the V and the B are interchangeable in both modern and ancient Greek. If you so, so. But even though people have been studying these ideas for years, actually that name of tribology first came up in 1966, when Peter Just wrote a report for the UK government pointing out the cost of friction and wear to the UK economy. Now, an important point to make when it comes to this week's question. Slipperyness isn't really the property of one isolated substance. Actually, slipperyness is about how two or more materials interact with each other in different conditions. Sort of like environmental conditions. Right. Evelyn's fish shape ice cube covering an oil might have different tribological characteristics. Making no words again. Yeah, that's fine. Depending on whether it was, I don't know, midwinter in the ice was frozen or the oil was frozen, or if it was on a humid beach where the ice is melting and the oil is flowing freely. Yeah, good science have been terrible cocktail, I think, describing that. But you know what? Speaking of cocktails, I asked Ashley Martini, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of California, Merced about the origins of tribology. A prototypical image of the first tribologist is a picture of many people dragging a very large statue across the sand, an Egyptian image. And right at the front of the statue, there's a little guy pouring a liquid in front of the very large statue, the first lubricant, I guess, to facilitate the sliding of the large statue across the sand. And in presentations that you see where it's an introduction to tribology, people always start with that image and say, look at this guy as the very first tribologist. And I mean, do you use that picture at the beginning of all of your lectures? I have to say I never want to see it again. Tribology is a small field, but I've seen it quite a few times, so I'm quite done. Tell me about Leonardo da Vinci, though, because I know he has figures in a lot of bodies, right? You know, engineering and anatomy and painting. But he was quite important in this field as well. That's right. Leonardo da Vinci designed or sketched and probably built several what we call tri-bometers. So these are instruments for measuring friction, the resistance to sliding. And there are many famous schematics that he created, Leonardo da Vinci created, that enable measurement of friction that are basically what we use today albeit more digitized. So we know Egyptians did it. We know that Leonardo worked out how to measure it. How come it took until 1966 to give a name to the scientific study of it? Well, it all comes back down to the reason for tribology getting a name. Science knew that friction was costing the economy lots and the engineering would help to find the solutions. OK, I get it. Moving on. Evelyn's question has a long history, but finding the slipperyest thing isn't perhaps as straightforward as it might sound. But when it comes to anything vaguely mechanical or materials-based, who are you going to call? Is it ghost-pusters? Close. It's Mark Mdovnik, professor of materials and society at UCL. He knows what's going on when you get up close to surfaces where friction comes from between things. Well, first of all, in order to sound that that, you have to kind of zoom into the atomic scale and realize that most surfaces are not smooth. They're actually rough at the atomic scale. And so you can think of them like a mountain range. That's what they look like. And so when two surfaces come together which have got surfaces like a mountain range, the peaks kind of touch each other. But the rest of it doesn't touch. So where they contact is where you get this atomic forces and that gives it a kind of stickiness. And then do things rub past it. Well, that depends on how much those little mountain ranges kind of penetrate each other and create a friction. So take a shoe and the ground. So they're both rough surfaces atomically. But when they touch each other, they touch it only at very specific places. And then they start bonding together depending on which types of atoms you've got there. And that creates a stickiness. And if you try and sort of slide with your shoe across the ground, then you've got to break those bonds. And if the two roughness of the little mountain ranges are penetrating each other, you've got to break off bits of it. So the more that happens, the kind of stickier the shoe will be on the ground. And if you think about rubber, well, rubber is a soft material. So its mountain range is, you know, can squeeze into the valleys of the ground. And so there's a lot of area in contact. Therefore a lot of bonding and so rubber is not a very slippery material. So it's the more stickiness, the less slippery it is. And of course, it's all down to how one material behaves relative to another material. And whether they slip past each other, but of course put something between them and that can make something even more slippery. So the banana skin between the ground and the sole of your shoe, that, I mean, that doesn't happen in real life, though, does it only in cartoons? Ah, I thought that. Until one evening I was out walking and came across in the street, a perfectly posed banana skin. Like exactly like that mental image you have in your mind. You're doing it with your hands, though, right? I'm doing exactly. And in the interest of science, we decided to see how slippery it was. LAUGHTER Terrible idea. My husband desperately injured himself as a result. LAUGHTER Terribly slippery. Well, that's the commitment to scientific experimentation. Anyway, Mark Medovnik did the physics of the whole, what you've just described, the shoe banana pavement interface. So you can make something very slippery by putting something in between the two mountain ranges of the two surfaces. And that stops them contacting each other. And if that thing you've put in between them, is itself weak and easy to kind of break? Then, woof, off you go. You're not going to get much stickiness between them. And so you get very slippery. So water is a good example. Water gets in between surfaces, stops them contacting it itself flows. And so water tends to be quite slippery on the ground. Mark here is talking about something called static friction. It's what happens when the mountain peaks on a material surface start to form bonds with the mountain ranges of another. But different materials will have different kinds of peaks. Some might be higher than others. And that can affect how the two interact. But then add into the mix a liquid or oil or even a powder lubricant. And then it can just break those static friction bonds, getting in the way of the clashing mountain peaks. And that's a beautiful description. A lovely mental image. But let's get into the business of doing what scientists actually all about measuring. Yeah, so how do you actually measure friction in a scientific way? Say, for example, if I wanted to compare the grippiness of hiking boots and slidey bowling shoes, how do you even go about doing that? Here's Ashley. It's a great example and a great question because what you would do to measure friction, you can actually do it home. You would take a board or any flat piece and set your two shoes at one end. And then you would lift up the end where the shoes were placed and wait until one of them slid down. The one that slid down first would have lower friction. And so you can qualitatively compare the slipperiness of your two shoes. But then if you have, for example, taken a video of this experiment, you can use the angle at which the flat plate was tilted up to calculate what's called the friction coefficient, which is our engineering measure of friction. And I guess in that example, the slippy slidey bowling shoes, I mean, they're going to go much earlier. The hiking boots you sort of expect to cling on for dear life, even as you raise it up to quite a steep angle. Absolutely. And this is not something theoretical. That's the expectation you could go do that experiment right now, and it would be exactly as you just described. Okay, so the coefficient of friction is how tribologists measure slipperiness? Yeah, it's a ratio of two forces, the force resisting the motion and the force that's squeezing those two surfaces together. Okay, that is all very interesting. But other than finding out what is the slippery thing in the world, and if an ice cube in the shape of a fish covered in oil is a genuine contender, why is tribology so important enough that it has its own ology? Well, it matters everywhere. Anytime you have two surfaces that touch one another, friction will come into play. Friction, of course, is the only way that we can propel ourselves forward, if you think of the souls of your shoes, to the treads on your tires and your car. But it also comes into play if you're, I don't know, trying to design toothpaste so that it doesn't remove the enamel on your teeth no matter how hard you brush. Or if you're trying to design replacement knee joints, and you have to think about the friction that happens with movement. But there is also very large-scale engineering issues that are caused by friction. You know, you are essentially at times using energy into wearing material, cogs and gears and other mechanical devices, literally converting fossil fuel into something that wears those away. And that can have a really big economic impact. I asked Ashley Martini how they quantify just how much friction costs us. There's two aspects, actually. So we're focusing here on friction and what you just mentioned there is wear or loss of material. So the goal of the tri-bologist is to minimize friction, which is the resistance to relative motion. But then you also want to minimize wear, which is the loss of material, which ultimately requires the need to replace parts. So when we do a good job as a tri-bologist, our mechanical components are very energy efficient and don't need to be replaced for a long, long time. But it sounds like in many ways, what you're describing links into our climate crisis and the use of energy and the waste of energy, is there that anger to this, thinking about sustainability? Absolutely. When you think of sustainability, tri-bologists probably not the first thing that comes to mind, but it's incredibly important. And to be honest, it's one of the reasons that I remain and excited about this field. So back to the car example, say we as tri-bologists improve or decrease friction by 0.01% or something even smaller than that. And then you translate that to every single vehicle on the road. There's potential for huge impact. We'll use less fossil fuels. We'll have to replace parts less often. We'll have to dispose of fewer parts. So the potential impact of tribology on the climate and our earth is impressive. Do we have a sense of the extent of this? How much of energy goes into friction when ideally we'd like it to, I don't know, go into driving our car forwards? A huge amount. It's been estimated that up to 20%, maybe more of fuel efficiency is lost to friction. So there are many opportunities for us to have impact here. Whoa, as much as 20% of global energy use might just be down to overcoming friction, that is massive. Yeah, and 3% on where? Or at least according to one study from 2017? I bet you really enjoyed that study, do you think? Oh my god, it was like, can't it for tri-bologists? But the point is this, even if you just get a fractional reduction in friction or an improvement in lubricants or in optimum slipiness, that would end up making this massive difference. And that is why this is such an important field with such wide ranging application. Let's just scale back from the industrial for a second and get back to the everyday, like Evelyn's Fish Ice Oil creation. There are of course massive dangers and things being slippery in our everyday lives. Do you know, Hannah, what the three main culprits are? Wait, is it not banana skins? Very close in fact. Grape's chips and leaves. Isn't that a look about punctuation? Very close in fact, but no. Here's Professor of Mechanical Engineering at University of Sheffield and all-round tribology expert Roger Lewis. We've done a lot of work in the past looking at slipping and how people might fall over when they're at slippery situations apparent. One of the worst places for people slipping over in real life is when they go to the supermarket by the soft fruit, people tend to like to open the grape packets while they're shopping and sometimes grapes get dropped on the floor, grapes are very, very slippery when you tread on them. If you search on the internet, you'll find some stories about shoppers who've slipped over within supermarkets, particularly on grapes. You can imagine once a grape is squashed and the flesh exposed, it's quite wet and the skin as well makes it very slippery. Very slippery and also very expensive. In one case in Ireland, a woman received a compensation of 1.4 million euros from a supermarket for severe back injuries she got from slipping on a grape. But it's not just fruit, other food is problematic too. Another thing we've looked at as well as chips and how slippery chips are. There's a big story on the internet about a teacher who slipped over on a chip at a school. They ended up suing the school for a lot of money because they got quite badly injured. But yeah, it was just spalking on a chip, caused them to slip over. So we've tested grapes, chips and banana skins as well. This is a really good thing to use when we're going and doing outreach with school children. It really engages them. So we can do an experiment to see what's more slippy a chip or a grape. I think in the test we did, the grapes came out as being more slippy in those experiments. But it does depend a lot on the state of the chip. So if the chip's been out of the chip shop for a little while and it's got a bit cold and dried out a bit, then it's not quite as slippy as a nice hot chip which has still got the fat on it from the frying process. And tribology is not just a problem for personal injury claims. Slipperyness, it's a pretty big deal when it comes to rail travel. I know that we all don't about leaves on the line. But leaves on the line are the black ice of the railway network and they can cause huge problems. Yes, that's right. So this is when trains are coming into a station and leaves on the line reduces the friction between the train and the track, which means that they can't break properly and it causes what's known as overrun, which is when a train misses part or sometimes even all of the platform. Here's a train fact, fact, fans. Between the 1st of October and the 12th of December last year in Britain, there were 66 station overruns. Yeah, are they reassuringly? That was out of a total of 14,895,364 train stops in the same time period. I did not have that on my crib sheet. You just knew that? I am very fast on Wikipedia. It is not just station overruns though. Leaves on the line can effectively hide trains. Like a cloak of invisibility. Not like a cloak of invisibility, no. Actually, leaves they can form a barrier between the train wheels and the electrical parts of the track that help to pinpoint where the trains are. So when network rail aren't sure exactly where a train is, the trains behind will be delayed at red signals all until the first train's location is established just so that control rooms can be confident there's always a safe distance between trains and obviously that is going to cause delays. Train fans are super excited right now, but that isn't actually slip renaissance, which is what we meant to be talking about. No, but it was interesting, granted. Anyway, Roger Lewis is one of the experts in the world on leaves on rail tracks and what can be done to mitigate the actual chaos that they can cause. A lot of his research is all about leaves on the line. It is a very serious problem. The worst end, it can stop a train from breaking properly which could lead to a collision. And people being seriously injured. Aside from that, it doesn't just stop the trains breaking properly, it also stops them accelerating properly. So that's why lots of delays occur during the autumn. And now the leaves themselves, particularly when they're wet, are quite slippy. And that causes obviously the wheels to slip a little bit or the trains could go into a full slide just because they're a leaves there. But the process of the wheels rolling over the leaves under high pressure and perhaps high temperature because the wheels are slipping a bit more leads to the creation of this hard black leaf layer on the top of the rail, which can be very slippy. If it's dry, it tends to be OK. If it's wet, then it's very, very slippery. The formation of the layer is very complex. It isn't just a mechanical process. There's a lot of chemistry going on within the wheel rail interface. And there are complex reactions between the iron oxides that are present on the rail head and different bits of the leaf. So we've done some research recently that shows that tan insid leaves make a big difference to the friction level. If we do a simple friction experiment with leaves that have been soaked in water, we suppress the tan ins using a particular chemical. Then the friction levels are OK. But if the tan ins are present, then we get low friction. It's all about the tan ins, which are a big part of the flavor in tea and in red wines when Rogers' team tests for rail slipperiness. They actually soak leaves in water overnight, and they make a kind of leaf tea. And what they find is that a tan and leaf layer can give friction levels as low as 0.01, which is far less friction when you just use water at 0.2, which is 20 times less frictiony. And the point is that leaves can actually be more slippery than a man-made engine lubricant. OK. Well, here is a train-factor aid. Did you know that most trains have a sanding device that can apply sand between the wheel and the rail? So the driver can press a button, or it gets deployed automatically in emergency braking. It checks a little bit of sand, and that helps grip between the wheels and the rails. Sort of like an anti-James bond car. Yeah. I mean, yeah. So we have slipped into the field of friction and tribology, which has a huge economic impact for engineering, for trains, and for personal injury when people slip on grapes or chips. Our original question from Evelyn is about the slipperyest thing. Not sure we've got a definitive answer for her yet, but she did suggest that a fish might be a possible candidate. Did someone say hagfish? No. OK, but hagfish are truly amazing. If he says so. Well, they have a skull, but no, spying. They live at the bottom of the ocean feeding off dead creatures with an amazing sucker-style mouth, which is designed to wedge inside the carcassism, suck out all the juicy flesh. And they haven't really changed in about 300 million years, and they make an extraordinary amount of slime, which is presumably very slippery. Very slippery. Here's Mark with Dovnik. Well, hagfish are just an incredible phenomenon. It looks a bit like a needle. If you try and pick it up, it's got these glands. It excrete the substance. That then turns out to be incredibly slippery, but it isn't necessarily slippery when it's excreted. It's what happens to it when it hits the water. It suddenly absorbs huge amounts of water and blows up into this sort of very fluffy soft material that is lots of little fibers that are making water stick to itself. It's very weak substance. So if you try and grab it, you just slip past it the whole time, because it's easy to move past you. But the other thing is that you're going to have to do but then it's so much of it, again, it clags up on you. And any other prey that tries to eat it, so it's a defense mechanism. There's a brilliant picture online, if you look for it, where this truck carrying hagfish has overturned and the firefighters coming to try and clear it all away, made the mistake of spraying water onto it. And of course, the hagfish immediately emit all these and almost amount of slime. And how does this work? Well, it's a bit like making any kind of gel or jelly. So you're adding a fiber, tiny fibers inside the material that basically attract lots and lots and lots of water and they stick it together. And so you get something that turns from a liquid into a very soft jelly. And that's what hagfish are doing. They're making a jelly at the surface of them very quickly, almost instantaneously. And then of course, that jelly itself is so soft. It becomes very, very slippery. It really is worth looking at the photo of the car covered in hagfish and slime. It was caught up in the incident in the US. It just looks like something out of science fiction, possibly straight out of Ghostbusters, a whole car, just a regular family saloon car, just covered in these wedges of slime that looks like it's been caught in the wind and blown out of the doors and the windows. It took 5,000 gallons of water just to get the road free of slime. Good. And now I'm adding hagfish to the list of creatures I never wonder in Ganta. Now, Evelyn's dad had a sort of related supplementary question to the, what is the most slippery question, which was, why do my feet slip on a wet floor? But when my feet are even slightly moist, it's nearly impossible to put on a pair of socks without falling over and causing the universe. What's going on here? Is water slippery or not? Good question, Sam. I suggest we slide over to Roger Lewis, the man who can actually answer this. So what happens when you have skin in contact with water is that the outer layer of the skin absorbs some of it. So if you have a very tiny amount of water, maybe from sweating slightly, the skin tends to absorb that small amount of moisture and it becomes more supple so that when you're touching a surface, you get a much bigger contact area. So you get a lot more adhesion and so you get much higher friction. So if you do an experiment with your finger where you're gradually increasing the amount of moisture present, initially the friction level will climb until you reach a threshold amount of that liquid, which means that there's too much. It can't all be absorbed and then you form a kind of lubricant film and then the friction reduces again. We notice it when we might be putting our socks on after we've had a shower or been for a swim. We also use it as well, probably subconsciously. So if you're trying to open a plastic bag, I know we don't use those very often in the supermarket any more, when you're trying to separate the surfaces, you might sort of lick your finger and then you should slightly wetting finger to rub the bag to open it. Or if you're kind of leaping through pages of paper, you again, you might lick your finger just to increase the friction. OK, so that sounds question answered fairly quickly and efficiently for us. What about his daughter's slightly tricky question, what is the most slippery thing in the world? There is something that might fit the bill here, a completely man-made non-biological, but very slippery material, which could be the contender for most slippery thing. It's called Wambam Shangalang. Is it though? No, it's just called Bams, named after the ingredients. Bams is this incredible material that is very slippery. It's a ceramic, which in a way, it's surprising. It's made of aluminium magnesium, titanium diboride. It's very hard. In fact, it was discovered by accident because a lab in America was looking for a very hard material and turned out that this material is not only hard, but nothing will stick to it. And that's actually sort of a holy grail of material science, because having things that are slippery but hard is quite a hard combination to get. And this bar material seems to be it. And it's so new that we don't quite know whether it's got a defect, whether there's something that we haven't anticipated about it. We don't really know why it's so slippery, why things don't stick to it. And we don't really know how well it will stick to things. If you want to put them in, let's say, engine parts and so that they don't need lubrication, this is huge. I mean, it's trillions of dollars worth of fuel. And if we can reduce that by one of these miracle slippery materials like Bams, well, that would have actually a very significant impact on sustainability goals, but actually getting it to really have an impact on the real world requires all sorts of other hurdles that have to be overcome. For the average material that comes from discovery to the marketplace, it's 30 years. Right. So a human-made substance could have a huge impact on engine performance and therefore global sustainability goals. That's pretty good, isn't it? Maybe, but it was discovered in 1999. And I know that Marx said it would take 30 years to market, but I would have thought we'd have hints by now if it was going to revolutionize engine design. Right. OK, so it doesn't really exist. Let's try and get an answer to the actual question. What is the slipperyest thing ever? Yeah, we haven't answered that. So let's see what Ashley Martini has to say about this. I think the answer is probably it depends, but it's a great question. Going back to the ancient Egyptian example that we talked about earlier, remember that the guy at the front of the statue was pouring a liquid in front of the statue to enable it to slide across. So liquids are classically the slipperyest thing. However, it's a really good question because in the past few decades, scientists have developed super slippery solids that are actually more slippery than some liquids. So this is really exciting. A good example of this is probably something that most people have seen and that's graphite. So if you have a number two pencil and you scratch it on a surface rather aggressively, the black powder that comes off is graphite. Put that blackish material that forms on the paper between your two fingers and rub your two fingers together. You'll find they're very slippery. So graphite is an example of a very super slippery solid that's emerging to be competitive with the classical liquid that we've been using for hundreds and hundreds of years. So it's very exciting. So hang on then, sort of the extension of this is the idea that you could use it in the same way that you might use grease in, I don't know, the like the gears of your bike. That's exactly right. And in fact, engineers are combining these two things. So there are some graces that have graphite embedded in it that gets you the advantages of both the liquid and the solid to achieve super slippery mechanical systems. What are the advantages of the solid? So the super slippery solids that I mentioned, the example being graphite are chemically slippery. And what I mean by that is that their chemical structure is layered. The example here is a deck of cards. So you have a whole deck of cards. If it's in the box, it's pretty strong rigid system. If you take the deck out of the box and push the top half of the deck, for example, they just slide right across. So graphite and other materials that have a similar structure are layered in that way. So if you put them between two moving surfaces, they easily slide. They easily slide within themselves between the layers. So this is kind of the secret to their success. So these solids with so-called superlubricity might even be better than liquids at slipping. They could be the slipperyest thing. I feel there is a butt coming on. Your instinct was right, Dr. Rutherford. But unfortunately, that's only part of the answer because all of this slipperyness depends on conditions. So for example, some things are slippery when it's hot, some are slippery when it's cold, and not the other way around. Others are slippery in the vacuum of space, whereas they're not slippery here on earth and vice versa. So the best answer is it depends. And the longer answer is that slippery materials are those that nature made that way. But it always depends on the conditions that you're trying to observe the slipperyness. And it's actually graphite that is slippery on earth, but not in a vacuum. So guess what? Pencils don't work in space. That's lily. Love that fact. And the reason for that all comes down to the, it depends, which basically does seem to be the answer to Evelyn's question. But let's not forget her own suggestion, an ice cube in the shape of a fish covered in oil. I love that example. The slippery oil covered icy fish. I would guess that that is probably one of the most slippery things, because it combines ice, which is slippery in many conditions, and oil that's slippery in other conditions. So that actually is very clever, because it combines two different materials that are slippery under different conditions. I love that example. If the icy fish, for example, were on the North Pole and immersed in a glacier, would be just too cold. And the ice and the oil, all of it, would be completely frozen, and there'd be nothing slippery. So, Professor Fry, do we now know what the slipperyest thing is? Well, that depends, I'm afraid, Dr. Rutherford. On whether the materials are in space or on the ground, whether they are hot or cold or in a vacuum, or whether they're humid, and of course, it's all about what is slipping against what? But we think that a fish-shaped ice cube covered in oil is a very good contender for the title indeed. I love that. We've gone all the way around the houses on this from Evelyn's original question, and we've ended up concluding that her suggestion was probably the slipperyest thing in the world. And I want her to make an ice cube in the shape of a fish covered in oil and sends a picture. Yeah. I think she should send it to you. Should we just mention that little story that came up towards the end was the concept of writing using pencils in space, which triggered both of us to remember one particular story, which is sort of legendary, which is the notion that NASA had spent literally millions of dollars during the Apollo space program to develop a pen that would write in space, whereas at the same time, and in response, Soviet cosmonauts would set you do the best Russian accent. You'll be a pencil. That wasn't one of them. No, it wasn't, wasn't it? I felt like I'd built you quite high. No way, I'm going to roll into it. Ooh, look at the little group. No, that's cool. Obviously, cut all of this. Yes. But it turns out that story is just not true at all. Well, I mean, it's sort of junk, because I mean, partly the reasons why we explained it in the program, but also the real serious problem with pencils, if you're on board a space station or some kind of spaceship, is that as you press down on a pen, it's possible that little bits of graphite can fly off into the surroundings. And if a little bit of graphite gets into an electric circuit, it can short anything that's on board the spacecraft. So it's very dangerous to use pencils or boards spacecraft. Here we go. Rather than fry here to ruin your best stories with actual facts, destroying the memes one at a time. Now, we've got another note in the script, which is something I wasn't aware of. But it just, it simply says maths jokes. What does that, what does that mean? It's just because there's quite a sweet maths joke about friction. I mean, everyone is going to know it already. I don't know. But if you've got two cats on a tin roof, maybe the roof isn't tin. I don't think that's important. Wow, it really is the way you tell them. Two cats on a roof. Which one falls off first? Don't know. The one with the smallest, me, you. It's because me, it's a Greek symbol, the letter for the coefficient of friction. I mean, it's fine. It's OK. The thing is, I mean, once you explain it, I recognize the words. It's just that in that order, they don't have any of the components of constituting a joke. Tell me a biology joke then. What did you, what did you, what did you necessarily keep in their gardens? I don't know. Greek dictionaries. Genomes. That's quite cute. One little two biology. Time flies like an arrow and fruit flies like a banana. Now that's Groucho Marx. That's not me. That's funny. Yeah. Again, I think it really was the way that you told them and that destroyed it. Should we do Curie the Week? I think we ought to. We have a visual. Curie the Week this week. We do. Now, I think on this one, I've got to be honest with you, I think Adam and I are rather split. Because Adam thinks this is the most wonderful and remarkable thing that has ever happened. And I think it's a little bit weird. Yes. I think that's an accurate representation of our views. This is from Paul Carney, who says, I'm a semi-retired art teacher and now author, and consultant delivering art training courses. It's very good as well. He didn't say that. I'm saying that. And I'm sending you some pro-create portraits I did of you posted on Twitter as an entry to Curie of the Week. I use books on an ask me to help me construct them. Though a surgeon pulled me up and apologized for missing a one-centimeter artery from Adam's neck. So what they are, is their pictures of us doing our sort of hero poses. But in my case, half of my face and skin is missing and is replaced with a wonderful and annotated description of the anatomy of the skull all the way down to the deltoids. It's gorgeous. Now yours is very beautiful. Yours is like that kind of classical anatomical pose, the cover of Grey's Anatomy. I mean, it's very, very beautiful. It's a really lovely thing. Thank you. Mine is just drilled into my head. I can't see. Yeah. And I look quite happy about it, which is the weirdest thing. Yeah, it is a bit, I mean, and less detail. Imagine just like a picture of me, quite a good picture of me. Let's be honest. But then just imagine that there was like a trap door in my forehead into my brain. That's what we're going for. Yeah, I mean, mine is sort of beautiful zombie. Yours is robot from the future. But still, I'm vetoing your opinion on this. We think this is wonderful and pull you up. Curie of the Week. Congratulations. OK, we are back next week. If you have any other questions that you would like to send us or entries for Curie of the Week, creepy or otherwise, not saying this one was just letting that word hang in the air. Send them in to Curie's Gaces at BBC.co.uk. See you next week. Bye. This is a real life story of the supernatural told by the people they happen to. Presented by me, Danny Roberts. There is a very strong sense of pure evil. Subscribe to Uncanny on BBC Sounds.
