Hey listeners, I'm excited to have you here with me for episode 788 of People Behind the Science. Today, we're broadcasting our interview with Dr. Rebecca Wattom. listeners Rebecca is a leader in a bioinformatics research center that scientists use to share and analyze their data on bacteria and bacterial genomes. The center originally focused on bacteria that can make us sick. In order to develop vaccines, identify drug targets and predict outbreaks of illnesses. However, there are a lot of beneficial types of bacteria that are also now being studied based on their use for things like fermentation, alternative energy sources, probiotics, and other purposes. Rebecca is primarily interested in examining the similarities and differences between groups of bacteria, and she shared some great stories from her life and research in our interview. So listeners, sit back and enjoy this episode of People Behind the Science. Every day, discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNeely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to another episode of People Behind the Science. Today, I am thrilled to introduce you to our guest researcher, Dr. Rebecca Wattom. So Rebecca, thank you so much for joining us on the show today. How are you? I'm doing well. Thank you. How are you? I'm doing well as well. And we're excited to learn more about you and the wonderful work that you do. But before we jump into all of the details, I do want to take a moment to introduce you to our listeners. The listeners, Rebecca is a research associate professor in the Network Dynamics and Simulation Science Laboratory within the Bio-Complexity Institute of Virginia Tech. She received her bachelor's and master's degrees from the University of New Mexico in biology, and next she attended the University of Wisconsin-Madison, where she earned a joint PhD degree in Entomology and Veterinary Science. Afterwards, Rebecca received a MacArthur Postdoctoral Fellowship to conduct research at the University of Arizona in Tucson, and she remained there for a second postdoc before accepting a position on the faculty at Virginia Tech. And listeners, Rebecca is here with us today to talk about some of her experiences in both life and science. So Rebecca, I'd love to hear a little bit more about life first. So can you start by telling us how you like to spend your time when you're not very busy with work? Well, where we live in Blacksburg, Virginia, the Appalachian Trail is very close. We do a lot of hiking. We try to get out. It's a beautiful place for people who like to do outdoor things. We hike. We do canoeing. There's a lot of nice wildlife around. So that's primarily the things we do for fun. I like it. It's a good way to get some fresh air, get a fresh perspective on life outside the lab. Yeah. Perfect. Well, I'd love to talk a little bit about your research next. So can you tell us, Rebecca, for someone who's maybe not familiar with the work that you do specifically there at Virginia Tech, how do you describe it? I work on this NIH funded project, wherein our 14th year of continuous funding. Congrats. Thank you. Yes. A bioinformatics research center for people to bring in and analyze their data on bacteria. So mainly it's bacterial genomes. And bacteria are in the news a lot. And people sometimes are irrationally frightened of them. But bacteria are a large part of our lives. They are a large part of who we are. In fact, if you look at all the cells on a human body and count the number of cells, you're actually more bacteria than you are human and cell numbers. Now, of course, if you go to cell weight, the human cells are much bigger. But we rely on them. They rely on us. And we just give researchers ways to study them. Part of that is that this project was originally funded to look for bad bacteria, pathogenic bacteria to try to figure out ways to develop vaccines and drug targets and ways to predict when there was going to be an outbreak of something bad. But there's a lot of good bacteria too. So although our resource was initially funded for disease, it's used by people all over the world to examine all sorts of things like fermentation or alternate energy sources, all the things that now we're learning that bacteria can be very useful for, including like probiotic treatments. So I'm the outreach and biology lead of that project. And for my own work, I dealt very deeply into different bacterial groups and analyze what makes them similar or what makes them different. Those are the things that are interesting to me about the project. Very cool. Rebecca will talk more about this project as we go through our interview today. But I do want to talk a little bit about motivation at first. I know all of our listeners out there and myself as well are always on the lookout for things to continue to motivate us in our daily struggles. So do you have a favorite quote or saying or something that really motivates you? There's a couple of quotes that I really like. One is by Shakus Kno, I don't know if you are old enough to remember him. He was one of my heroes. Yeah. Yeah. And one of his quotes that I really like is he said, what is a scientist after all? It is a curious man looking through a keyhole, the keyhole of nature, trying to know what's going on. And that's what science is for me. It becomes so clear to me now with bacteria that we know so little of all of us out there in the world. And looking through this tiny hole and making decisions and deciding what we know when it's actually this whole universe of things that we can't see, but we're trying to open the keyhole a little wider. And then there's also a quote I like to minus Fallen, one, two Nobel prizes. This is one of my scientific heroes. And he said, the best way to have a good idea is to have lots of ideas. So I like that one too. Well, those are awesome quotes. And you sort of hinted at it a little bit in terms of Linus Pauling being one of your heroes. But I always love to hear about who the people are, who motivated and inspired today's scientist. So if you have other heroes or role models or people that really stick out in your mind, I've always liked Louis Pasteur quite a bit because he just did so many things. Pasturization, all these different vaccines like the rabies vaccine. And I was a kid. My grandfather would scare us to death with these stories of people getting rabies. This one grandfather was born back in the 1880s. Or really, if there was a rabies vaccine in the United States or it was available for poor people, and my gosh, the stories he would tell were just great, fire site stories of people getting rabies and chaining themselves trees while they were still loosed before they could enter their family. Oh, it's enough to give you nightmares, right? Yeah. So Pasteur did these amazing things to develop the rabies vaccine. But he also was just a total genius and an amazing guy. I also like Fred Soeper. I don't think many people know about him. He worked with the Rockefeller Foundation and he was the director in their South American studies. And one of the things, there was a mosquito, an offering scamby, which is the primary transmitting mosquito, a really bad form of malaria, a psmodium cell syndrome. It got into Brazil. It was transmitted over and they were having malaria outbreak. And he went in and actually eliminated this mosquito from Brazil. Wow. Who would have thought you could think about it with all the rainforest and everything? Who would think that that was possible? It's a huge undertaking. Yeah. He was like an amazing engineer. Had this specific time cable. In fact, there's a great story about him that I'll tell you real quick, although it sounds terrible. He knew where everybody was supposed to be at every minute. He had it all outlined where each of the workers were supposed to go to do this, that, and the other. And at one of the places that people were supposed to go in and search for mosquito larvae and kill them, the factory, there was an explosion. And people were killed and they found out about it in the office. Everybody's crying. They're very upset because they know that their guys were there and they're dead. And about an hour later, the two guys walked into the office. And what does he say? He says, you're fired. You were supposed to be. Wow. But the person I really admire is Howard Timmond. He is one of the people who's from the University of Wisconsin. And Watson and Crick, who finally discovered the form of DNA, their premise was the information went from DNA to RNA to proteins. And Howard Timmond worked with viruses that were RNA. So from the experiments he was doing, he knew that it wasn't going from RNA strictly to protein, he felt strongly it was going back to DNA and then coming around back to protein. And everybody thought he was a quack. So decades he worked trying to do this. And he finally found reverse transcriptase, which is a protein that we use in the lab commonly in that viruses use all the time to make DNA from RNA. And it's blown open research biology because PCR is based on that right, polymerase chain reaction. So he had spent decades with people mocking him and stuff doing this simultaneously in a different lab, David Baltimore. One of his grad students came across it. So he had been at meetings where Howard Timmond was mocked. But he remembered that. So he called Howard Timmond on the phone. He said, hey, guess what? I found our reverse transcriptase and the Howard Timmond was like, yeah, I have one too. They both published it and they both won the Nobel Prize for it. But I admire Howard Timmond more because he just stuck out it for decades. He knew what he thought was right. And he just kept doing it and then he succeeded and Baltimore got in just by luck. Right. That's the last minute. So those are three of my heroes. Well, I love it. And I think a lot of these amazing scientists from history can really motivate students and people to pursue a career in science themselves. So can you take us all the way back to the beginning Rebecca and tell us what really first got you interested in science? It's been a very strange trip for me. I always loved biology and I always loved that class in school. But when I was taking algebra in school in New Mexico, our algebra teacher was an alcoholic and we had him right after lunch and he would go out and get drunk and then come to teach class. I didn't learn any algebra that year. Although I got excellent grades in it. But when I tried to do the next level of math, I started failing math because I didn't have the algebra because my teacher had been in alcoholics. I didn't think I could do science. So at that point I was doing acting and when I first went to college, I was getting a degree in theater arts. But I didn't like it very much because when you're acting and stuff, you rely on everybody else for your self-worth. They respond to you as how you feel about yourself and I didn't like that so much. So I thought, well, I really like biology. I should try to do that. But there's a lot of math. But I went back and I started in college with elementary algebra and then worked all of the way through statistics. So I had to do all of this to be able to get my biology degree. So I guess it's a story to people, but even if you have a bad experience in school that prevents you from doing something, you can't go back to the beginning and learn it all again because I was able to do it. But that being said, that years I spent in theater arts have been equally or maybe more important to my job success because I am very comfortable speaking in front of large crowds. I have the ability from all of that to read my audience and figure out when they're getting bored and try to bring them back in with a joke or whatever. I've given more than 50 workshops over four continents in the past few years and I'm very good at that because I have that theater arts training and a lot of people who do science just cannot speak to crowds and they just bore people to death. And we need more people who can make it fun for people. A lot of the naysayers and scientists like the flatters or the vaccines are bad. Those kind of people generally speak really well. They don't have any facts behind them that they speak much better than the scientists who have all the facts that are trying to present the other side. So I really think we should have more public speaking or maybe make scientists take theater classes just to enable them to get their message out to the world because in the last couple of decades they're really taking it on the chin. So theater arts, it looked like it was going to be something else that it actually really helped me in what I do now. Certainly and I'm so glad you mentioned this because I actually myself had the same experience where I did theater and middle school, high school and a little bit in college as well. I found that that really made me more comfortable in front of the crowd. And like you said, you're more able to connect with people just because you're more used to what the dynamic is between a performer and the audience. Yeah, and you can stand up there. You aren't scared of speaking in front of a large group. And the more you've done it, the more you see you are to looking out to the crowd. And you can read who is totally lost, who's getting bored, try to bring everybody together. If I'm doing workshops, I can tell right away when someone's having trouble. So I can signal to somebody that they need to help this person so we don't leave people behind. It's really been a gift that I wish that more of my fellow scientists would work a little bit harder on. But of course, we all have so many things we have to do in this job. And I think people take public speaking is a little much, I guess, but I think it would really help them. Well, listeners, definitely work on your public speaking skills. Don't be afraid of those acting classes. Right. I think it's funny Rebecca that you also mentioned that you had some struggles with math because I think the area that you're working in right now is particularly heavy in the quantitative skills department. Yeah. And I know you started kind of in more of a maybe entomology, veterinary science kind of path. Can you tell us what then helped you make this transition over to this comparative genomics of genetics? Well, the continued genomics is more looking at patterns. I don't think it requires a lot of mathematics and I'm able to use computational tools and pipelines that other people have developed. I don't code myself or anything, but I can use their stuff to analyze data. So I am always a little bit slower than everybody else. I really admire people who have really excellent math skills and can look at a series of numbers or a series of statistics and it's just an immediate recognition for them. Whereas for me, I have to embarrassing to admit this, but I really have to think about that impose and ponder it and work it out in my mind exactly what it means. Luckily, my kids all have better math skills than I do. So I'm not really doing a lot of statistics. There are some statistics in my work that most of it is observational. Gotcha. Well, I'm really glad you shared this experience, Rebecca, because I think it helps our listeners out there. Maybe there are people out there who are struggling because they really, really love science, but they're maybe not doing well enough in their math courses that they think that they can make it in a career. And I think you're a perfect example of someone who's really short up some of those weaknesses that you've had and you're working with collaborators who maybe compensate for some of the things that you maybe aren't as strong at. Well, you bring the sort of scientific skills to the table. Yeah. And I can't even remember, thank goodness, what my SAT was in math to go to college, but it must have been terrible because I just didn't take any classes after beginning algebra. And I don't know why I was allowed to do that. I mean, I started one and finished that class. I guess it was geometry and didn't do well on it. So then I was put on to a different track. But then I was able to do this. So if you really want something, although I hate it when people say things like that, you really want them to think you can do it. But in this case, it was a lot of hard work. And it took a lot more time in college, but I can remember when algebra just sort of suddenly clicked to me in that elementary algebra class. And now I really love algebra. I think it's enjoyable when I was in school with that teacher. It wasn't unenjoyable because we didn't have to do anything because he was just sleeping at all. You weren't challenged. So I love to chat a little bit more about some of the projects you have going on right now. I know we're back at there. So many cool things going on there at the Bio-Complexity Institute. So what is something that you're working on right now that you are just really excited about that you want to tell us more about? OK. This is something that I just started developing. And it just is totally amazing to me. Humans we have might have conjured up which are the powerhouses of ourselves. And they are an original bacteria that was invasive to the humans. We developed a symbiotic relationship where we both rely on each other. And over the years they've become an integral part of ourselves and are considered part of the human cells. Well there are other organisms that have these symbiotic relationships with bacteria as well. In fact I pet all organisms and see we just haven't pieced it out yet. And I've been looking at this organism called Buknera which is an endosimplion of apes like who would even think apes who cares about apes. I think that if you want to squish them when they're on your plant. But back in the 70s people were, and I'm not sure why they were choosing apes. Maybe it was a crop management or something but they were feeding apes in the lab and cutting like essential things needed in the diet to see if they could grow on that. And some of the apes could grow fine when you cut out things that they needed. They were still seem to produce them. And at that time people were saying they must have some bacterial relationship with them. Anyhow a lot of people have looked at these bacteria in apes. And I started using this for our workshops and our, the name of our website is Patrick, the biomekin from Atlantic's website. Because what we do in our website is allow people to do all these complex analysis steps or their bacterial genomes. And the genomes of these endosimbiants are really small. So you can do it really fast in a workshop. So it makes things really easy for people. And these bacteria have gotten really, really small. So I started looking at them and all I did what is known as a pilot genetic tree were looking for close relationships between these organisms. And I was finding that they had close relationships with these other organisms. And I started looking at them. And they are all endosimbiants, different types of insects. And then I started looking at their genes and what they have retained because the normal bacterial genome is 4,000, 5,000 genes. These guys are down like 600 or 500 genes. Oh wow. So they've grown away everything that is not useful to them anymore. And generally what they're providing is something to the host. So I was looking at the different metabolic pathways and things that they're providing to the host. And each of these were really specific, depending upon the organism that they were endosimplion, though. So I created this phylogenetic tree with these different endosimplion and put pictures of the insects that they're in. And it was really fascinating to me. I'd really like to explore this deeper and go more broadly. And generally people look at one of these organisms at a time. But I noticed that they were all clustered together. And I really like to do a deep dive on that and the exploration of how this endosimbiotic relationship developed within this branch. And what are the things they all share on one of the things that are different to their unique coast? So that's one thing that I'm really interested in right now. Oh, this is very cool, Rebecca. And I knew the mitochondria story, but didn't appreciate that every organism potentially has different types of endosimbiants and specifically, I think the A for example, is really cool. It just makes sense to me that must be more widely spread because the insects that they found these things in are aphids, CP flies. I don't know if that name means anything to you, but they're the agents that spread, splitting sickness in Africa, carpenter ants. They're so wide and diverse that it makes me feel like everybody must have them. It's just that people haven't looked yet because it takes some special stuff to grab things out of a cell and then determine, oh, this is bacteria because in the same cell you have, this is the host cell DNA. And then to figure out, oh, this is bacterial DNA. That takes a little bit more doing so people don't generally go to those lengths, but it'd be really interesting to explore. Oh, and the other thing that's really fun about them is they're all named after these old German and English sociologists. Oh, really? Like, NARA is named after the spookner guy who was the first one who formulated the theory that there was this endocentioidic relationship. There's what the endocentian of the CP fly is called Wiggles' Worthia and it's named for one-cent Wiggles' Worth. I love it. It was a British entomologist and then there's one called Blochmonia who was named for this guy, Blochmon, the obscure German zoologist. So if you want your name to live forever, I guess work on a kind of bug. It's a mind-bacteria and they name it for you. You have the history books, I love it. That's right. Well, we're back. We've talked about some of the phenomenal work that you're doing in your research and we've touched on some of the struggles that you had in your early academic career, but I think some of the challenges in the struggles that scientists faced are really important to talk about because not everyone in the general public really appreciates kind of what the process is to become a scientist and what the process is in terms of doing your everyday work. So do you have another story of a struggle or a failure or a big challenge maybe that you're facing that you can share with our listeners today? Well, my generation of scientists came like right after the golden age when there was lots of research funding. You generally, when people got a PhD, there weren't many people doing it. You would get into an academic position. There was enough research money for everybody like it was 70 or 80% of the grants were funded. Oh, wow. And then there was this explosion of biologists, PhD biologists and suddenly there aren't a lot of jobs and it's still continuing today. I wonder how I would counsel people about getting jobs in biology just because the market is so tight and now getting funding it's like 10% or less of the grants that are submitted get funded. And when you write grant proposals, it becomes sort of like a child to you almost. You love this idea. You think it's really great. You have to be able to put so much energy into it and then when it's just dismissed and it may still be a good idea, because there's so little money, although there's a lot of money. You're the 11%? Yeah. Some of them they don't even read it after you put all this work into it and it's just devastating. So being probably the first generation where things weren't gonna work out for you, very few people were gonna move into the secure jobs, very few people were gonna get grants. You see your colleagues, people you think are really smart and really good in their failing after a while and having to go into different jobs. So there's been a lot of that. I often wonder why I'm still here today and I just sort of worked out. I think that my current jobs worked out well for me because I have a certain level of attention to detail that I didn't really realize I had until I started doing this job that it's very good for. So it works out well for this job. Generally a lot of it is this new realm of science where they're just aren't enough jobs for the number of PhDs that they're producing. So a lot of those people are not gonna get the jobs that they think they're gonna get and I was one of them. I'm not a tenured faculty member of Virginia Tech on the research faculty member but it's still a great job and I still like it but it wasn't what I expected was going to happen when I reached them and got my PhD. Certainly and I imagine a lot of our listeners are sort of acutely feeling this pain. So do you have any advice or maybe any thoughts on things that maybe helped you in terms of securing a position or maybe keeping yourself sane while trying to search for one? Ah. Ah. You've blocked those memories. Hi. Looking back on it, I just don't, we just kept doing it. Both my husband and I are similar times of scientists and we just kept going much longer in postdocs. This with ours was the first probably generation or the second generation where people stayed in postdocs. Originally, some people would go right from a PhD into a faculty position. The postdocs going on for years just because there aren't positions open. So it's hard if you're raising a family which we were at the time but when I looked back on it, I think, oh my gosh, we didn't have any money. What were we thinking? Having kids and doing this stuff and struggling but at the time it didn't seem like, oh, we don't have any money, what are we doing? The time had just seemed normal. But when I look back on it, I think, yikes, boy, those were some clothes calls. How did we make this work? Yeah. Well, Rebecca, thank you so much for sharing some of your own challenges but we don't just want to talk about the dark days in science. I'd love to have you share next one of your stories of success. It's a proposal that came out recently to look at large samples, like large bacterial samples or whatever. When you look at it like a teaspoon of soil, there's just so many bacteria in there. It's just phenomenal and we don't know who they are because our knowledge of bacteria is limited to things that we can actually culture and describe that way. We can get it down to a single isolate, I would up, we know that it's all the same organism in there. You can isolate the DNA and then we can have a lot of knowledge about that, but even within our own bodies, there are bacteria that we can't get down to a level of taxonomy like the genus species for humans. We can't get to that level with these bacteria because we can't cultivate them. So there have been several funding agencies that are really interested in trying to delve into these kind of samples and figure out which bacteria have the potential to be harmful to people and what bacteria we don't have to worry about. But for my point, it's just like knowing all these there. That's what's really interesting to me. So we have a proposal that I don't want to say too much about because it's still a negotiation, but after the last few years, putting out proposal after proposal after proposal, this one is a negotiation for funding to look at these particular things to take from a large, complicated sample of a community of organisms and try to figure out if there are things that are potential threats to people and then get the sequences from them and analyze those bacteria. And it's a really cool project. And this is the first good news, a pat in a couple of years, so we're all quietly sort of celebrating, but not so bored because we have a receipt for funding yet. You don't know what's going to happen yet. But it was a great proposal to write. And when I went to started working with these people, I was sent up to Washington DC, they reminded me of like a speed dating thing for this particular proposal. People who knew how to do micro-fluidics and people who knew how to do bioinformatics and people who knew how to work on pathogens, they brought them all into the room. We actually all had to wear little tags on what our expertise was. And it was just, I couldn't believe what people were doing. In my own thing, it was like science fiction for biology, but people are actually doing this now. My job was dropped to my chest. And I'm just so happy to have been part of the proposal at least and to be thinking about this new front biology. And it's just going to be amazing. Because even if we don't get it, somebody else does. They're doing the same thing. And what we're going to learn from that is, if we add more funding and stuff, it's an amazing time to be a biologist because we are getting these amazing tools that are really helping us widen T-sto's keyhole, making it bigger now so that we can see more of what's going on and understand how all the communities are interacting. This is just an aside that gives you an idea of how our understanding has changed about bacteriology. A couple years ago, a paper was published. You know what the principal component of breast milk is? It's not to feed the human infant. It's to feed the bacteria and the babies got so that the bacteria start to produce the things that the baby needs. Oh, that makes sense. Bacteria in our enemies for so long has always been antibiotics and stuff. And now we're getting more and more understanding about how we have this interdependent relationship and what we all need. Right. It's just really amazing. Well, a tentative congratulations to you and the team Rebecca on this proposal that's so exciting. Yeah. And we've talked about life both within and outside of science. And I'd love to jump outside a little bit to talk a little bit more about what you are reading these days, Rebecca. Do you have a favorite book, whether it's one that you read currently or recently or a long ago that you can recommend to me and our listeners today to add to our own reading lists? OK, this is an older book that actually my son bought it on Audible. I knew it the author, Ray Baratbury, of course, everybody's sure to them. My son had bought something wicked this way. Come when I listened to it and then I got the book. And then I recommended it to my book club because it's just amazing. What I like about it is the hero in this book that saves everybody. He's a soldier or a great politician or a really smart scientist. He's the janitor of the local library who likes to read books. And another thing that's just the read, Bradbury constructs his sentences and uses his metaphors. It's just wonderful. And another thing I'm in my 50s now, for this janitor is in his 50s. And I guess this was written back in the 60s, your step-and-days you think the janitor is 54 years old. And he talks like he's 80 years old. Like he's going to die the next day or something. I can't even move them so old. I don't know that way. I don't think 50-year-olds feel that way these days. Oh, that's good. Of course, at the end, he feels more rejuvenated. But those are the things I like about it is the age thing. And the rising, I don't feel that way, thank goodness. The other thing is that he gets to be the hero. And it's not one of the typical heroes that you would have. So I think it's a pretty good book. Have you ever read it? I have not. I'm going to have to put this on my book list as well. I love the story of the everyday hero too. That's an awesome aspect of it. Yeah, that's right. Well, we're back at great recommendation. I will put this out on our website for our listeners to find as well into add to their own reading lists. And one of the things that we haven't necessarily touched on in detail yet are some of the opportunities that you have as a scientist to travel as part of your work. And I think this is a great opportunity. And you get to go to so many places and meet so many people. So is there a favorite place or backup that your science has taken you? I have been so lucky. I've gone to so many amazing places. I've gone and given workshops in Argentina and Brazil and South Africa, China, India, Thailand, and in Europe. And it just really opened my eyes. There are things about each of these things I liked when I was in South Africa. We were at this research station where the first multi-drug resistant tuberculosis was discovered and all these scientists there that are collecting the state and analyzing the state and the facility there. It was just amazing. Although it was in Durban, South Africa. There's a lot of crime. I wasn't allowed to go outside the hotel at night. Because even to walk to the restaurant next door, they didn't want you to do that. Because the crime rate is so bad there, but anyhow. So when we were in China at one point, we went into one of their hospitals. And we gave a workshop in one of their hospitals. And just to see how the different hospitals are structured between the United States and China. It was really interesting. There've been a lot of really interesting things. I've seen perhaps the most memorable one was the trip to Thailand. It was invited to get a workshop there. And flying out of Roanoke, your plane is off in the way. So when I came with the way, I missed the connection in Japan. Oh, no. And I'd had to change the airport in Japan. I got to Thailand. I mean, you fly like 12 hours to Japan. And then it's another 13 hours on the Bangkok. When I got there, the person who had to meet me wasn't there. It didn't have to be a contact. So I had to get into a cab and hope that I was going someplace all very stressful. And in Thailand, and in a lot of countries, I've come motorcyclists are weaving in and out of traffic around the cars to go faster because the traffic is so bad. So I mean, this cab can't speak to the driver. He can't speak to me. I hope that he's taking me to the hotel. Oh, also they'd lost my luggage. So I had no luggage. And I was supposed to get to speak to people that day. I was so delayed trying to get there. And I was going to have to talk to close, I traveled it. And then the cab driver, a motorcyclist, kept in front of him and he ran over the motorcyclist. Oh, geez. I was like, oh, I can't believe. Everything that could go wrong did, right? Yeah. But the motorcyclist was fine. He had hands with just a little bloody, but it was still very stressful. Right. Probably more stressful for the motorcyclist than for me. So did it get better from there? Oh, yeah. Great people. The Thai people are the happiest and the most optimistic. And we have people from this was a totally different group of people usually I have South Americans or European, but these were Africans people from our end, from the Middle East, from different countries in Asia. And they were all there because they have all their native food fermentation processes that all their local cultures are using and they're trying to figure out what the bacteria are so that they don't lose these things that they do and also to create more efficient food production that they need to know who the players are in that. So it was an amazing experience because before this trip, everything we did at work was disease disease disease, bacteria, not friends, but this was all bacteria. Look at all the amazing things they do for us. So I just really love that trip. Just love meeting those people and finding out what they did. It was really awesome. I love that. Well, it sounds like you've had some wonderful opportunities to travel as part of your work. And I love that you hinted at some of the great people that you've been able to meet on some of these experiences because I think the people that you work with in science are really part of what makes the job so great. There are so many just funny, creative, amazing people that you run into as a scientist. And I think it's very contrary to sort of the stereotypes that are often put out there in the media in terms of what scientists are like or maybe what the life of a scientist is like. So Rebecca, do you have another story or an example of just some of the fun and funny things that scientists do in there together that are maybe contrary to this stereotype? Generally, when our group gets together, we just have a really good time. And we like to go out to dinner and we like to talk one of my compatriots, you're a great computer scientist that aren't on national law. You always want to travel with this guy because you'll know what places we should go, what you should see. So we'll do our workshop, which I love doing workshops. I love needing the students and interacting with them and helping them with their data. And then we meet collaborating scientists. But then we go and we see things. And I've seen some really amazing things with these guys and there's so much fun to travel with. And so many good stories and laughing. People don't think scientists like that. But the way I think of my collaborators and my colleagues, I'm not really thinking about sitting around with our slide rules and pushing our glasses up our nose. I'm thinking about all the jokes we're telling each other and things that are so funny to us. And it's really wonderful. I work with a great group of people and we have a great time. And I like meeting all these other people, too, because I've never met a stodgy biologist that I can think of. Generally, these people really love what they're doing. They love their ideas. They want to talk about them. And I don't know if that sounds like a blast to people, but it is. Really, it's a lot of fun. I think it sounds fun. Or Becca, I love that you're able to get together with your colleagues outside of the traditional lab work that you're doing. And I think it is so much fun to see your colleagues in a travel experience or to get together outside of the lab. And I think when you do this, you sort of talk about everything under the sun and life outside of science, but also the research as well. And I know as scientists, there's always something standing in the way between you and the ideal questions that you're just really dying to know the answer to. And this is often funding, but sometimes also staff and technology and just maybe feasibility restrictions on the work that you're trying to do. So do you have one of these big dream questions, Rebecca, that you've been dying to answer but haven't been able to yet? I sure do. And it's something that I try to couple of the best things that I've done in my life, whether you're funding rounds with, or trying to generate some preliminary data for this, but even if you're funding for preliminary data, the process to develop a vaccine takes decades. And you never know when it's going to fail. And can the vaccines are the best public health preventive techniques that are around? They're so valuable. It's training your body to attack a pathogen bacteria that you need as well as things that you don't need or putting a body through tremendously harsh treatments. So I really prove that same. And now with this big data that's coming along and looking at these things, generally when you are exposed to something, you have two phases of immunity. The very first immune response that we recognize is called the innate immune response and that's just your body is growing. It says, oh, I've been hurt. It could be you got hit with a baseball bat or you got a scratch and you've got some tetanus bacteria in your arm or something. When your body senses that it's been injured in a way, it throws out this first cell go, which is called the innate immune response. Now when you are going to be successful about something that's protected immunity and that's why we give vaccine to people, to kids and everybody else because it gives the immune system a taste of this is what you need to fight. And then the immune system says, oh, okay, got that. And then when it's exposed to it, it goes into what is known as protective immunity, which is a very detailed strike against a particular invading pathogen. Some very pro vaccine. So I would really like to take on some of these anti vaccine people that have done so much damage to our public health approaches to these things because they're so important to all of us. But what I really like to do is I've seen a lot of papers where they've looked at the very earliest hours after you vaccinate someone with a vaccine that they know works. And you can see that right away your body is doing all this stuff. These different genes are going up, going down, it's responding. And in there somewhere in the secret is to tell you this is the steps that lead toward protective immunity against this organism. Here it is. Well, if we could compare the vaccines that we know will work with vaccines that we know won't work, we could tease out what exactly those responses were to make it more predicted within the first hours after a vaccine of what is going on. This vaccine has a strong probability of working. This one doesn't. So I think it would really cut down the time it takes to produce a vaccine at least allow you to throw out the ones that aren't going to work. We can do this with bacteria, they can generally with bacteria, we have to use what they call an attenuated vaccine. It's a live organism that has been damaged in some way. So it's not going to cause disease. So the body is recognizing that. But you can also kill that organism as well. So you can have these two different flavors or take that organism and make it in a way that it can go through some steps but it can't be fully invasive. So if we could take those kinds of flavors and expose them to human cells and look at the differences between them, I think we could get a way that we could do vaccine prediction that not only would help us say maybe this vaccine will work and maybe this vaccine won't work. This is called a systems vaccine approach which is just pretty new that people are thinking about. You might even be able to tell a certain population that this vaccine won't work on so that you don't waste time or maybe help certain people because not everybody responds to things the same way. So you may be able to target vaccines for specific populations when a regular vaccine won't work for them. So that's the thing I'm really interested in these days. If I could get funding to do this, it would just be great. And even if it didn't give us everything we wanted, we really understand exactly what's going on in those first hours after the vaccine and be able to get a deeper understanding of what the immune system is doing. Right. Well, this is very interesting and I think you brought up a lot of important points in talking about this dream project and in addition to that, you shared some great insights throughout our conversation today, Rebecca. And I would like to ask you for one more thing for our listeners out there. Do you have a piece of advice that you can give them, Rebecca? Maybe something that you received that really helped you along your own career path? Well, when I think about it, I'm often dismayed, particularly with sometimes my kids, about jobs and stuff, that it's not fun. All right. Maybe it was my dad. I don't remember saying that. They call it work. So I think that we have led a lot of people to believe that if you don't go to work every morning, seeing a song of joy and doing part-wheels and then you shouldn't be doing that and the work is supposed to be fun all the time. It's not like sometimes it's hard and it's up to you to make it fun for you. That's what I think is the real thing. Make your work fun for you. But there are a lot of aspects of your job that are often tedious. So you just have to learn the ways to get through the tediousness to get to the parts that you like. So my advice to people would just be take the job that you have. Do your best at it because I always want to be proud of the job I did. I don't want to do things in a sloppy manner. At the end of it, even if somebody didn't like the job I did, at least if I go home and feel like I put everything into that. And I was very detailed and it didn't give them the results they wanted. But that's not my fault. It's the way the data is. So you try to make that unproduced to do that kind of stuff and then it'll make your life a little bit easier, I think. Well, I think that is a wonderful advice listeners. Find the joy and the fun in some of the mundane tasks that you do because I think you're absolutely right here, Rebecca. There is so much TDM and mundane work in science that leads up to these big exciting discoveries. I think that everybody talks about and they tend not to talk about the daily droll happenings that led up to them. So very important message for our listeners is there any other message you'd like to give them or any other advice? As a woman, when I was first doing this, I can remember when I was pregnant with my first child and the other women scientists saying, oh, maybe you should wait till you have 10 year or maybe you should do this, but they were worried about. And a lot of women at age didn't have children. I have three children. You can do these things. You can have a career. You can have kids. I think my kids are all reasonably well-adjusted if I don't think that they've suffered from having two scientists parents. And I would like to encourage women to do their job and also have your life because you can do it. You can have kids. You can do these things. That would be the main thing that I would want especially. Now we're getting more and more women scientists coming in. Generally the women are outnumbering the men, both in graduate school and in medical school and law school. And I'm sure it's moving and the engineering is making a strong push at that too. I wish we were getting more in politics, but perhaps we will. So it's important to realize that you don't have to give things up. I was sort of told, well, you can only have one child at the most. So you don't have to do that. You can make things work for you, ladies. You can have your job and your life too. You don't have to give up one or the other. Well, such an important message, Rebecca. Thank you so much for sharing it. And I absolutely agree. You can balance these two, the career and the family. You don't have to choose between them. So great message to leave our listeners with today. Can you tell them if they want to learn more about you and the wonderful work you're doing? Where should they go? They could email me. That's the easiest way. My email address is bar bottom, which is all lowercase rda TTAM at bt.edu. And if you want to check out the resource that I work on that I'm quite proud of because it's a pretty awesome resource. It's the Patrick Dio and Phamatics Resource Center. And the URL for that is t a t r i c b r c dot org. Perfect. Well, listeners, definitely check out Patrick and get in touch with Rebecca. If you have any questions and Rebecca, thank you so much for joining us on the program today to share a piece of your story. Oh, thanks. It's been great at a good time. Well, it's been wonderful to chat with you. Listeners, great to have you here as well. We'll see you next time on another episode of People Behind the Science.
