 Hey everyone, I'm AXCited to welcome you to episode 798 of People Behind the Science. Today, we're resharing our interview with Dr. Joseph Takahashi. Joe is working to understand the biological clocks in our bodies that control our 24-hour schedules. These clocks are controlled by a special set of genes in nearly all of our cells that turn off and on each day to regulate a wide variety of biological functions. Joe is studying these genes and how they contribute to our biological rhythms to control things like our sleep schedules, blood sugar, body temperature, and more. In our conversation, he shared some of his favorite stories from his life in science, and I hope you enjoy this episode of People Behind the Science. Every day, discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNeely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to People Behind the Science. I am thrilled to introduce you to our guest researcher today, Dr. Joseph Takahashi. So, Joe, welcome to our show. How are you? I'm great. Thank you very much. Excellent. Well, we are excited to learn more about you and the exciting research that you're doing, but before we jump into all of those details, I'd love to take a moment here to tell our listeners a little bit about your background first. Joe is a professor and the Lloyd B. Sands Distinguished Chair in Neuroscience at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center. He is also an investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Joe received his bachelor's degree in biology from Swarthmore College, and he was awarded his PhD in neuroscience from the University of Oregon in Eugene. Afterwards, Joe conducted postdoctoral research as a Pharmacology Research Associate at the National Institute of Mental Health. Before moving to UT Southwestern, Joe served on the faculty of Northwestern University for 26 years. Over the course of his career, Joe has received numerous awards and honors, including the Hanma Prize in Biological Rhythms Research, the NSF Presidential Young Investigator Award, the Serly Scholars Award, the Bristol Myers-Quib Unrestricted Grant in Neuroscience, the CU-RN's Capers Medal, the Outstanding Scientific Attinent Award from the Sleep Research Society, the W. Alden Spencer Award in Neuroscience from Columbia University, and the Peter C. Farrell Prize in Sleep Medicine from the Harvard Medical School Division of Sleep Medicine. He's also been elected as a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, a Member of the National Academy of Sciences, a Member of the National Academy of Medicine, and an honorary member of the Japanese Biochemical Society. And in our interview today, Joe is going to share more about his own life and his science, but Joe, we'd love to hear about your life outside of work first. So can you start by telling us what you like to do when you're not very busy doing science? Well, what little free time I have, my favorite activities are actually playing tennis, going skiing, hiking, eating great food, and drinking wine. Excellent. You have some fantastic hobbies there, I must say. So what kind of food do you like to eat? Actually, I'm very broad-minded. I love all kinds of foods, but of course, I love Japanese food and many other kinds of exotic foods. Excellent. Are you a fan of the sake that the Japanese rice wine as well? Yeah, I wouldn't call myself a sake expert. No. I probably prefer wine. Gotcha. Well, wonderful to hear a little bit about what occupies your free time, but when you're not doing science, and as you mentioned, that free time, I think, is more and more precious the later you get in your career. But can you tell us a little bit more about your career in your science next? So how do you describe what you do? Does someone who's not familiar with your field? Well, we work on trying to understand the biological clock in your body that controls our 24-hour schedules, such as sleep, wake, activity, and other aspects. We now know, of course, that those processes are controlled by an internal clock, and that clock is actually genetically controlled. So there's a special set of genes that turns on and off once each day. That clock is actually found in almost every cell in our body, and that basic cellular clock is what really regulates all of our 24-hour activities. Not just in behavior, the obvious things like sleep, wake, the beating, and fasting, but many processes were not really aware of, like the metabolism or liver regulation of blood sugar, all sorts of processes are actually being tuned by the clock throughout the entire day. Absolutely, and I have to ask, as someone who researches circadian clocks, are you particularly mindful of these biological rhythms in your own life? I probably should be more mindful, because one of the unexpected aspects of being a professor is you have to travel a lot. So international travel, of course, cause jet lag, and that is probably not so good for you. If we had an ideal situation, we wouldn't be changing time zones appropriately, because we know that chronic jet lag in animals leads to very bad consequences, can even promote things like cancer, as well as metabolic disorders. Certainly, and I look forward to chatting more about some of your research and your findings as we go through our interview today. But I'd love to take a moment here towards the beginning, Joe, to talk a little bit about what motivates you. I think as scientists, you need a lot of motivation to get through the ups and the downs and the challenges of the career. So do you have a favorite quote or a saying or a force that really resonates with you? Well, what really motivates me, I think it's really the excitement of discovery. Doing scientific work is just so interesting, because in some situations, it's like being in an archaeological dig, discovering a completely new civilization almost that you didn't know about. So that's what really, I think, excites scientists. The process is never ending and always interesting. So one finding leads to another. And many activities that we do in the lab really are like treasure hunts. For example, in my laboratory, we were looking for genes that control your clock. And the way we did that is we had to use this random process where we just randomly changed genes in the mouse genome. And then we tested those mice to see if they had altered circadian clocks. And we were very lucky. We found this spectacular mouse that had a 28-hour clock instead of a 24-hour clock. Interesting. But then the next challenge was to then go from that mouse to a gene. And that process back then in the mid-90s is very laborious. Still pretty laborious today, but not so much. It actually took 10 people in my lab working together as a team for three years to go from that mouse to the gene. Oh, wow. But that process is literally like a treasure hunt, because you know that mouse is carrying this almost secret information that you want to know. And we can eventually be using the tools of genetics and molecular biology ultimately track it down and find that gene. So that was just an amazing process. Absolutely. I love the image you painted here of scientists hunting for treasures following the clues to find these little nuggets of truth in the work that you're doing. And I think that can be very motivating and inspiring. And I'd love to hear a little bit more next though about some of the people who might have motivated you or inspired you or had a big impact on your career. This could either be a long story or a shorter one. Whichever you feel like. But as a scientific role model along the same veins of what we've just been talking about, one role model would be professor named Seymour Benzer who worked at Caltech. And Seymour Benzer really revolutionized using genetics to understand very complex behaviors in fruit flies. He actually took this same approach many decades before us of mutagenizing flies and then devising very clever screens to find alterations in fly behavior. So the very first screen was actually done in his lab for circadian rhythms. And that led to the identification of the very first gene in circadian rhythms. So Seymour not only used that method to study clocks, but he was very interested in many different aspects of human behavior. So he tried to look for learning in memory mutants, which he succeeded in. He was interested in neurodegeneration, all sorts of diseases that he could try to model them of fly. And he did that very successfully. So as far as my career goes, a lot of the things that we do in the laboratory in the mouse were really inspired by Seymour Benzer's work in the fruit fly. Fantastic. Well, I think you chose a very impactful person to look up to and certainly someone who had an amazing impact on your specific field. So great to learn more about him, but I'd like to hear a little bit more about your own personal story. So Joe, can you take us all the way back to the beginning and tell us what first sparked your interest in science? Well, it was back when I was a kid. I lived in some very interesting and unusual places. I grew up in Burma until I was seven. And there's a lot of tropical forests and very unusual animals. For example, they use elephants as bulldozers and tractors. Oh, wow. I also lived in Karachi, Pakistan when I was 10 to 12 years old. And again, there were all these exotic animals there. Camels, of course, are most obvious. But the marine and sea life was quite remarkable there also. So that combined with my parents allowing me to have almost any kind of pet I wanted. Oh, wow. That's dangerous, right? I really just love biology, animals, and wildlife. So that passion always stayed with me. And through high school, I didn't really know I was interested in science or any particular area. My dad's not a scientist. He was an economist. So it wasn't until I went to college that I sorted the site that I was interested in biology because of animals that I was also interested in engineering because I like to take apart things and put them back together. So we kind of combined those. I went to college at Squirtmore College. I became a biology major. And then all my friends who were bio majors were all pre-med students. So I hadn't really thought about being a doctor, but they were all on this pre-med track to go to medical school. So I guess I decided that's what I'm going to have to do if I major in biology. Right. That is the option, I think. Yeah. So for me, that was a default option. So it became pre-med student. But during my junior year, I had really three incredible professors at Squirtmore who had all these laboratory courses in physiology, animal behavior, and in marine wildlife and ecology. So it wasn't until I was a junior that I figured out that I didn't have to go to medical school. And I started on a research project that I did my senior year there. That turned out to be a project looking at the electrical discharge of electric fish. And what we found, this professor Kenneth Rosson and I, is if we recorded continuously from this fish, some of them would go totally silent in the daytime because they were nocturnal fish. They were hiding in the daytime. And then at night, they would come out and then they would discharge their electrical organ, which they use for location. So that was just fascinating to me because when we continued to record from this fish, it would go totally silent in the daytime. And then at night, it would fire all night. And I learned that that was controlled by circadian clock. So we studied about it does in different species of electric fish and have them did this and the other app didn't. They were just constant through the whole day. So that was what my thesis project was on circadian rhythms and electric fish. And at Squirtmore, you have an external examiner when you have an independent project. So my external examiner was a professor named Patricia DeCorsi who was one of the first people to show how light resets a circadian clock in a mammal. And I met her and then I decided to take a post back year off instead of applying to graduate school. And I went and worked as a technician with her at a marine station. So that kind of combined all these different interests and behavior, but also I was interested in marine biology. That was wonderful because Pat DeCorsi was one of the pioneers in the field circadian rhythms. And she became my advisor on where I might want to go for graduate school. Actually, I was lucky. I had lots of choices where to go. That helps. And in the end, with Pat's advice, I actually decided to go work with the first name Michael Medaker at the University of Texas Austin. And he was just a wonderful person. That was an interesting choice because I'd also gotten into Stanford University to work with Colin Pindray, who's one of the founders of the field circadian rhythms. He was actually the advisor, Michael Medaker, my advisor. So he's my academic grandfather. Anyway, one of the things I love when I was a teenager was cars. I guess I still love them. So I've always had sports cars my entire life. And I went down from interview to Austin, Texas Medaker picked me up at the airport in his MG TD. I don't know what that is. I'll admit, but it's a classic MG sports car from long ago. Okay. You don't see too many of those anymore on the road. So he had you write that right? That's right. Very cool. So then tell us what happened after graduate school. So after graduate school, I went and did a short postdoc at the NIH where I worked in the NIH National Institute of Mental Health with a very interesting fellow, his name was Barton Zatz, who had just started working on circadian rhythms in a particular organ called the pineal gland. And that's sort of what I had been working on previously with Medaker. We had shown there was actually a clock located in the pineal gland that we could isolate and study in culture independent of the animal. So that showed that that piece of tissue had a clock in it. So back then, we didn't know that maybe every cell in your body has a clock like we did today, because we had no way to measure the rhythms from normal tissue. We had to study particular tissues where we had some kind of output like the tissue secreted a hormone that fluctuated. Today we don't have to do that. Today what we do is we measure what we call a clock gene that is cycling every day, goes up and down. So that original period gene that I mentioned along back has a spectacular tensile rhythm every day. And if you measure that output and you can see that almost every cell has a rhythm of that gene. Well, it's been great to hear more about your path as a scientist Joe and some of the early stages of your career. And it made me smile when you were talking about early in undergraduate this idea that you were, I guess I have to be a medical student if I'm interested in biology, because I had the same thing happen to me. And as soon as I started getting into research, I was like, wait, there are other options. So I think that happens to a lot of people out there. So is there a project that you're working on now, Joe, that you are just so excited about that you want to share more about with us today? Sure. One of the new areas that we're working on that we didn't work on before is actually aging and longevity. It's not just because I'm getting old. But it turns out that recent work in the field of circuiting rhythms has shown that the time that you eat maybe just as important as what you eat. For example, if you feed a mouse to high fat diet and the mouse can eat the food anytime it wants to, it becomes obese. But if you restrict when the mouse can eat that food to just 12 hours during the day and you give it at night, which is the normal time the mouse is active and eats, it doesn't gain weight. If you give that same food during the daytime, which is their quote wrong time, it becomes obese. Interesting. The mouse is eating the same amount of food. The only thing is different is the time which it eats it. So that's telling us something very important that the way that we process and metabolize nutrients is completely different at different times of the day. And we know that the circuiting clock is highly involved in that regulation. The other interpretation of that is that you can actually eat something that's not so good for you. But as long as you eat it at the right time, it might not have negative consequences. I'm liking this. If you've probably heard about a bunch of fat diets recently, they're called intermittent fasting. Some people are trying to eat only during an eight hour interval each day. And then they fast for 16 or less stringent would be they eat only during a 12 hour interval and fast for 12. Those are actually all forms of the kind of experiments that we're doing in the mice already that we call time restricted feeding. The reason we got interested in longevity is that the most effective way to extend lifespan in almost all organisms that have been tested is to reduce the amount of calories that are taken in. But it has to be a pretty severe reduction. So in a mouse, if you give the mouse 30% fewer calories, that mouse will live 30% longer. Oh wow. I didn't realize it was that much of a correlation. That's awesome. Yeah, it's actually been done even more severely. They've done as much as a 50% reduction in calories. And those mice lived twice as long. Wow. So it's really a pretty robust and remarkable effect. The only problem with those experiments is when we look at how they fed the mice, it was a little bit funny. They fed them on Monday, Wednesday and Friday mornings. But they didn't feed every day. So that's the first thing. They also fed typically in the morning, which we would consider is the wrong time for the mouse. So the mouse is actually going through a feeding and fasting cycle, but it's every two days or every three days depending on the day of the week. Now, of course, the reason experiments were done that way are for practical reasons. The experiment takes four years to do longevity experiment in a mouse. So to have to feed the mice every day 24, seven. That's a commitment. That's a very big commitment. Yes. I can't get the people in my lab to do that. So what we did was we created an automated feeding system, so we can control both the time and the amount that we feed the mice. And we also designed it ourselves so that we could scale it so that we could have many hundreds of these devices, not just handful, because to do really good agent studies, you need very large cohorts because you're doing survival curves. That's what we're in the middle of right now. So we have done a number of experiments already. And one of the things we first found was when you colorfully restrict a mouse, even if you feed them every day, which we think is more normal, the mice eat the food as soon as you give it to them. Now, of course, that makes sense. The mouse is hungry and it's restricted. It doesn't know that the food is going to be around in the future. So it's better eat it when it hasn't. What that does is those mice self-impose a time restriction because they eat all the food right away and then they eat no food until the next day when the next bowl of food comes in. So that already says that color restriction not only reduces calories, but it also time restricts. So what we're trying to do now is to see whether we can separate those two factors. If we restrict only the time, but not the calories, well, that still have a benefit. We know it already has a health benefit, as I told you before, for bad diets. But the key question is, is it going to extend lifespan the way that reducing calories does? So I'm really excited about that because if time alone gives you a benefit without having to reduce calories, the bat might have practical applications for us because it's very difficult for humans to maintain very strict color restriction for a very long time or even short time. Yeah, that's true. A 30% reduction is very stringent. I almost know one can do that. But time restriction is much more achievable and many people are already doing that voluntarily now. Definitely. Well, Joe, this is phenomenal work and it does have some really exciting implications, like you said, in our own lives. So I look forward to seeing where this work goes next. And you hinted at some of the challenges in talking about the experiments that you're doing that some of them are running on the scale of years for studying things like longevity. So I think there are tons of challenges and struggles and failures in science, but they don't often get talked about. So do you have a favorite one of these stories you'd like to share with us? Many of the projects we taking on have been certainly a challenge. So the very first one I'd mention about finding the clock gene screening mice. That was a huge challenge because when we did that work, everybody thought we were crazy. They said, there's no way that you can do a mutagenesis screen on behavior and mouse. So then we did the screen and got it interested in now. Once we got the mouse, then they said, well, you'll never be able to find a gene because it's too much work. It's too hard. And you're not a geneticist. Right. And you said, hang on. So actually, I had to learn on the job and become a geneticist. So I would say genetics is really my second career after neuroscience. So those certainly were big challenges. Today, I think there are many challenges. One for the current generation of incoming scientists is really the competition for funding and supporting your research. That's always on our minds because of course, you can't do research unless you can obtain funding somehow. Well, Joe, thanks for sharing some of these struggles and challenges that you've had in your career. I think they are so important to bring up for our listeners just to give them a realistic picture of what life as a scientist is like. We don't want to focus on these alone, though. I'd love to hear it next about some of your successes. I know you've got quite a few to choose from. Do you have a favorite success you'd like to tell us about? Well, I probably already mentioned my favorite success. I gave away. You couldn't keep it in. Yeah. I think our most important discovery was finding the clock gene by taking this long journey of starting with the mouse and then using that mouse to find a gene 30-person years later. So that event of finding the gene was extremely important for us because it connected the clock gene to the original puriage gene and started the beginnings of a pathway for how the clock works. And that occurred like in 1997. And in a four-year period, what we talk about today in the textbook as how the clock works, that was all put together immediately after that in that relatively short period of time four years or so. So Joe, I have to ask when the data first started coming in and you were starting to hone in on a particular gene, what was going through your mind? Well, of course we had no idea what we would find. So that's one problem with that treasure hunt is there might not be treasure at the end of your hunt. In this case, we were very lucky because this particular gene was very informative. Now, over the last 25 years, we've continued to do screening in a similar fashion with many other mouse mutants. And we've identified those genes. But when I looked back, had we found some of the genes that we discovered recently as the very first gene, it would have been very difficult to interpret what that gene was doing because these are genes where people have only recently, say in the last 10 years, understood what they do. So you couldn't put it into context back then. And I think that would have been an example where we might have been in dead in the water for a very long time. Well, thank you so much for telling us more about this success. Do you remember how you celebrated back in 1997 when you first fell in this first clock, Dean? I can't remember a specific event like that, but I do remember particular breakthroughs in that gene discovery. So one very important breakthrough is when you're going from the mouse to a gene, you have to find the location of where that mutation is on a chromosome first. So we did that. And then you have to gradually hone in into a smaller and smaller region of where that gene might be. That process is called genetic mapping. And then once you get it down to a reasonable region size, then you have to isolate the DNA in that region. So when we were doing that, no one had been in this region before. And so the DNA and not the isolated. So we have these maps that we were working with. One is a genetic map, which is based on crossover events that we can infer in the mouse. And then the other is a physical map based on the DNA that we isolate. We know we're in this kind of region, but if we made any kind of mistake in interpreting those maps, we could be way off base. So one of the approaches we took was to take these really big DNA fragments and to make transgenic mice with them to express those pieces of DNA. And then see whether a normal copy of that DNA would rescue or repair the mouse mutant by crossing it to the mutant. And we did that experiment. And one of those fragments, it was at 140,000 base pairs long. The fragment of DNA completely rescued the mutant mouse. Oh wow. Yeah. So that happened in August 1996. And that was really a watershed event for us because we knew on the basis of that experiment, the gene had to be within that piece of DNA. And that we hadn't made a mistake and we're off somewhere else in the bushes. Well, that is amazing. Thank you so much for digging in a little bit deeper and telling us more about the success story and some of the key moments that helped you get there. And I know as a scientist, you're reading a ton to keep up with the literature. And it can be hard to find time in your life to read for fun, but that's something me and our listeners are trying to do more of. So, Joe, do you have a book that you've enjoyed that you can recommend to us today that's either a science book or a non-science book? I would highly recommend that the title is Time, Love, and Memory. And the author is Jonathan Weiner. And the book is about Seymour Benzer, who we talked about at the very beginning today. And it's really just a very interesting story about Seymour Benzer and all the things that he did and all the people around him. Phenomenal. Well, Joe, we will add this to our reading list on our website. And we've talked about some different aspects of your career and one of the things that you hinted at in the beginning is that you end up traveling quite a bit as a scientist, which can cause a little bit of circadian chaos, but can also be a lot of fun. So, do you have a favorite place that your science has taken you? So, I think the most interesting place that I visited was when I was a graduate student. I was able to visit the institute where Eurgen Ascha worked. So, Eurgen Ascha was the director of a Moxplonk institute devoted to studying human circadian rhythms. The institute was located in ondextrurumini, which is in Bavaria near Meaghan. And the reason it's so remarkable is in order to study circadian rhythms in people, it's very difficult. You have to isolate those people from all time cues. So, how do you do that? Pat itself, right? Sort of like that. So, he had two isolation rooms that were underground. So, they were called a bunker. So, these were apartments that were underground. They're completely isolated. No windows, no time cues, but they had 24-hour service, I guess you could say. So, volunteers would go into isolation for long time, typically a month, maybe longer. And they had their sleep wake times recorded, and they would also continuously measure their body temperature rhythms, which fluctuate every day. Those were really the first really controlled experiments done on human subjects, where it was clearly demonstrated that we also have our own internal clock. But human rhythms are kind of interesting. One of the things they found was that the sleep wake rhythm is a little bit more malleable and could be dissociated from the body temperature rhythm. And that gave one of the first clues that there might be at least two clocks, at least in humans. I see, I couldn't imagine being a participant in those studies, though, being in isolation for a month. Right. Anyway, so, I get to stay at that institute for at least a week. One of the highlights, of course, was to get a tour of the bunkers and to actually see those rooms. What were they like? There are apartments, very austere, and just no windows. Yeah, nothing fancy, right? That's about it. Very cool. Thanks so much for telling us about one of these memorable travel experiences you've had. And we've talked about some of the different people that you've worked with over the years in your career as a scientist. And I think there are so many amazing, wonderful creative people in science that it's a shame that there's a lot of stereotypes that don't necessarily match that reality. So I love sharing stories on our show that really highlight the human side of science and some of the fun and funny things that you do when you're together. So, Joe, do you have a story of a quirky tradition or just a fun-haired fun memory that you shared with colleagues? I guess one of the nice things about the field of circadian rhythms is it's relatively small. And a lot of us have grown up together over a long period of time. And until recently, people didn't think circadian rhythms were that important. But you guys knew, right? Well, I think we're lucky that it turned out to become more important. The biggest problem a long time ago was that there was no disease that circadian rhythms caused. At least not a disease that required a hospital or the doctor a physician would have to pay attention to. But I think that's gradually changing now. People know that almost all aspects of physiology have some circadian components. And the clock genes now have direct connections to all these pathways that regulate immune function, metabolism, even influence cancer. So I think nowadays is getting more appreciated. But anyway, the field, because of that, has been small. And it's just a wonderful supportive field. We have all these incredible characters. So our meetings, we're always and still are incredibly fun to get together. The other reason is the labs are all over the world. So we really have friends literally all over the planet. Very cool. So do you have any particular things that you like to do when these groups get together for conferences? We probably like to eat and drink a lot. You did mention a love of food and wine. So that makes sense. The nominal will great to hear a little bit more about your field. And some of the fun things are able to do together when you're traveling for conferences. And like you said, meeting people and making these connections across the globe is I think so cool and so rewarding. And we've talked about some of the big questions that you've answered already in the field of circadian rhythms and circadian clocks. And some of the things I'm sure that you want to answer. But there's often things standing in the way. I think things like funding and staff and technology and feasibility often limit scientists. So Joe, I want you to tell us today, if we gave you anything you could possibly dream of, what is the one question you would want to answer first? So in the lab, we have the capability of doing most things that we want to do because there are just so many incredible resources at our fingertips. But something I've thought about for a long time but have never really engaged is that it would be really nice to be able to do more experiments on human patients and subjects to really see how the findings we make in the lab can apply to human nature and human biology. But those experiments are extremely expensive to do for human subjects having to put them in isolation. It's highly unlikely that you could do very large scale projects because of that limitation. Much of what we want to do in human genetics requires tens of thousands of subjects to have enough power to detect genes, for example. That's going to be very difficult and circadian rhythms and in sleep. But I think the first initial steps are beginning to be taken in those directions. Definitely. Well, Joe, thanks for dreaming big with us today and talking through some of the big questions that remain in your field. And like you said, there are a lot of challenges in applying some of your findings to what's happening in people. And I think it just sort of have to slowly work your way towards those. And some of the things will never be able to do. But I think it's fun to dream big because so often you are limited by the restrictions of reality as a scientist. So I guess one last thing I'd love for you to share with our listeners is a piece of advice. So is there one piece of advice that someone gave you at some point in your career, Joe, that really helped you that you can pass on to our listeners today? One piece of advice I always give to beginning scientists that I talk to a lot is that they really have to begin with what I call first principles. And that is that you need to have a fundamental understanding of everything that you're studying and trying to do. In particular, the kinds of measurements you make in the laboratory. Some of these are pretty abstract. You might buy a kit from a company and use it to measure some molecule. That's very common place today in molecular biology. But you'll have no idea what that kid is doing or how it's measuring. So if you don't have a first principles understanding of what that measurement is, then you might misinterpret what it means. You might not be aware that there's some kind of artifact that the measurement might give you that's wrong. So that's what I really like to stress is that it's really important when you do something, you try to understand what you're doing to the best possible means that you have. My other piece of advice is don't become a dinosaur. But that's what I wanted to be when I was a kid when I grew up. I mean by that is that in science, a lot of what we do is enabled by technology. Technology today is moving so fast that sometimes you feel like you can't keep up. But to take advantage of all the tools we have, you must try to embrace that technology and to grow and learn yourself and keep evolving. That way you won't become a dinosaur. I like it. Excellent advice for our listeners, Joe. Is there any last piece of advice you want to leave them with or maybe a last message you'd like to share at the end of our call today? Well, it's really time to think more about sleep, the timing of sleep, and the timing of nutrition for best health and how those principles are going to be applied to medicine in the future. I think that they really are going to make a big difference as we begin to know more about how circadian clocks and sleep really affect our physiology. Absolutely. Wonderful note to end on here, Joe. Can you tell our listeners if they want to learn more about you and your work? Where should they go or how should they get in touch? Sure, since I have kind of a long email, I think the easiest thing would be to Google my name. And there you'll easily see my address and email at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, which is where I am now. Excellent. Well, listeners, definitely check out Joe's website, learn more, get in touch if you have any questions. And Joe, thank you so much for joining us on the show today and sharing a piece of your story. Thank you. Well, it was a pleasure to speak with you and listeners great to have you here as well. We'll see you next time on another episode of People Behind the Science.