 Hello listeners and thanks for joining me today for episode 794 of People Behind the Science. We're looking forward to revisiting our interview with our guest Dr. Bruce Beeler. Bruce is an author and a researcher studying the birds of the Boreal Conifer forests of the United States and Canada. He's interested in understanding how the permanent resident birds survive in these forests all year round. And in our interview, Bruce shares some fantastic stories from his life in science. So sit back, relax, and get ready for this episode of People Behind the Science. Every day, discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNeely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to another episode of The People Behind the Science podcast. Today I am joined on our show by the wonderful Dr. Bruce Beeler. So Bruce, welcome to our program today. How are you? Marie, thanks so much. It's great to be here and looking forward to chatting with you. Absolutely. We're excited to learn more about you in your work. But before we jump into all the details, I do want to take a moment here to tell our listeners a little bit about who you are and what you do. So listeners, Bruce is an ornithologist and research associate in the bird division of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History. He completed his undergraduate studies in American Civilization at Williams College and he received his master's and PhD degrees in biology from Princeton University and there he studied behavioral ecology in birds. Afterwards, Bruce worked for 10 years at the Smithsonian's Natural Museum of Natural History and before returning to the museum, he worked briefly for Conservation International, the Wildlife Conservation Society, the U.S. Department of State, counterpart International, and the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. Bruce is also a fellow of the American Ornithologist Union and he is the author of 11 books, including a field guide and the checklist for Birds of New Guinea and also the recently released book North on the Wing. And in our interview today, Bruce is going to share some of his own fantastic stories about life and science. So Bruce, first I want to hear a little bit about you and what do you like to do when you're not doing science? Well, I like to do natural history. It's a bit of a bust of its holiday, I guess you'd say. I'm looking out the window right now in my little home office and I'm looking at birds and squirrels out back at the feeders. I love nature. I like to be outside. I love to play tennis. I love to go for hikes. I like to kayak. All those sorts of things that many of us love to do. So pretty normal stuff, I think. Excellent. Excellent. Excellent. I think it's good to get outside and enjoy nature when you can. Not always be cooped up in the building doing work. Absolutely. Fantastic. So now we've heard a little bit about life outside of science, but I do want to talk about what you're doing in your work next. So how do you describe your work to people who might not be familiar with what you do? Well, writing is a very big part of it. So the best way or one of the best ways for scientists to get the word out to tell their story is to write it down and have people read it. Today, what I'm doing these days mainly is writing books. But for most scientists, the scientific career is writing scientific papers. That was a very important part of my life for several decades. But now it's writing books. And I do that because it seems to me and I think the date of bear it out, you can get to more people by writing a book than by writing a scientific paper. So your audience changes. And the focus of the books these days is getting broader and focusing on all of natural history. Excellent. And what's wonderful to hear a little bit about what you're working on these days. And we mentioned in our introduction that you've already written 11 books, which is phenomenal. And I love talking about books on our program. So in addition to some of these books that you've written, do you have any particular books that you've just really loved and want to recommend for me and our listeners today? Absolutely. I'm reading one right now that is absolutely fantastic, struggling to understand it. It's Carlo Revelli's reality is not what it seems. It's a short book. It's only maybe 175 pages long. But it tries to explain the physics of the universe in those 175 pages. It has nothing to do with my own scientific career. And that's one of the reasons it's interesting to read. I've always wanted to try to understand something about quantum mechanics and quantum gravity. And I am still in the midst of trying to understand that. I don't think you're alone there. I can mention one word that he talks about is granularity in fields. One of the big weird things about nature that we can't see is that everything isn't a field, but it's also particulate. And it's those things at the same time. And luckily, I'm not a physicist, and I'm a natural historian and biologist. Those are a lot easier, it seems. Anyway, it's a great book. It's a great read. It's beautifully written. And it goes back to 480 BC. So it's really quite a tour de force. So Carlo Revelez' reality is not what it seems. Heavily recommended. Well, wonderful recommendation. I will add this to our website for our listeners to find there. And we've talked a little bit about books now and a little bit about your work. And one of the things that I do in terms of drawing motivation and inspiration from places is sort of collect little quotes and sayings from authors I like and people in the world. So do you have a favorite quote or a saying that really inspires you? I bumped into one just the other day. Very instructive. It's a quotation from the brilliant Stephen Hawking. It's short and to the point and I really take it to heart. And I will read it to you here. I have not memorized it. And I'm not very good at memorizing things. Perfect. One, remember to look up at the stars and not down at your feet. Two, never give up work. Work gives you meaning and purpose and life is empty without it. If you are lucky enough to find love, remember it is there and don't throw it away. So pretty pithy. As the real Hawking saying is really incredible. And for me, all three of those are important. But really number two, never give up work. To me, work is salvation. Having work to do is one of the joys and life. Absolutely. And before we started our official interview, you did mention that you are quote unquote technically retired, but you haven't been able to give up the work I see. This is too much fun. When you work for the man, for many, many years I work for the man, as we say, you're working for somebody else. There you have a boss right over you, breathe in down your neck. And that's fine. Great. But have your own boss is one of the great releases to be able to work on those things that you daydreamed about when you were supposed to be working on something else. Now you can actually work on that daydream. You can pursue that daydream. And that's one of the joys of retirement is you can think about that for decades and decades and say, make a plan. I can work and work and work. And then you can really work on those things that you love so much. Wonderful. And I know you mentioned in talking about this inspirational quote, Stephen Hawking, fantastic source of inspiration. Are there other people who really maybe inspired you or served as role models or encouraged you to pursue science? Let me tell you a little history about my how I came to be a scientist because it was definitely round about sure. In 1958, I was on a picnic with my mother and my brother. We were out in Lake Roland in suburban Baltimore and it was the middle of July. It was hot and we were cooking hot dogs on a grill. I looked up and I saw a bird. It was a red bellied woodpecker, a male red bellied woodpecker, which is quite a beautiful bird as this beautiful red sort of a cap and cape. And I had an epiphany. I was eight years old and I fell in love with birds. Well, really what I fell in love with was woodpeckers. So my mother marched me down to the Enoch Pratt Free Library in downtown Baltimore and we got out Ben's life histories of North American woodpeckers. And I took that book out over and over again until they actually put it away so I couldn't get out that they put it back into reserve. Oh, they hit it from you because I was very annoying. And I fell in love with birds. So I was a naturalist. I was obviously not a scientist. I was just a kid. The question is how do you go from being someone who loves birds to being someone who does something with or for birds? And that's not so easy. And that's sort of the challenge of becoming a scientist or becoming a conservationist for that matter. And somehow I found my way to a senior fellowship. When I was a senior at college, I want a fellowship that allowed me to go overseas and study birds in New Guinea. Oh, wow. It was a Watson fellowship. It's a year abroad where you do anything you want once you win it. And I won one of those, which was a miracle in itself. And I went to New Guinea. I spent 15 months learning how to be a field biologist because up to that time, I'd been actually majoring in American civilization at college because the pre-med world was not my world. I was interested in nature and I wasn't as much interested in brushing shoulders and competing with all those pre-med people who were much harder working than I was, at least on those subjects. So it was around about way I had to go to New Guinea to find my way into science. So from New Guinea, I applied to graduate school. Somehow I managed to make my way in because of that New Guinea story. And then I was actually able to get a PhD in biology, which is remarkable in itself. No one would believe it. Well, this is a phenomenal story. And I think many people out there start with this interest in science as a kid, but they don't really know not even necessarily how to change it into a career, but that it's an option to make it a career, right? Exactly. And I didn't really answer your question because your question was who inspired you? Sure. So when I won this fellowship, I had some money now to go so that how do I learn and make a plan? I'm going to New Guinea. I've never been outside the United States. This is back in 1974 and 1975. What do I do? My friend who was actually at Harvard, and he had a mentor there named Ray Painter at the museum, the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard, this wonderful ancient museum. So I wrote to his mentor, Ray Painter, and I said, can I come and just be an independent student for six months and prepare myself to go to New Guinea? He said, well, yeah, sure. You're crazy. Yeah. What the heck? He gave me a little space. And he had just edited a book by Jared Diamond called Ava Fah of the Eastern Highlands of New Guinea. And this was Jared's first book, and this book became my inspiration. And that was my load star. The questions and the stories in that book that he published really inspired me and actually gave me that sort of impetus to really get my act together and do some decent work in New Guinea. So of course, I wrote right away to him and told him I was going to New Guinea and he opened his arms to me and said, let's see what we can do. He's still a mentor to me. 40 years later, we're still communicating and he still inspires me, of course, because like Stephen Hawking, he's one of those godlike scientists creatures that we don't understand how they get where they do, but that's pretty amazing to experience. Absolutely. So you mentioned you were sort of immediately drawn from woodpeckers to these birds of New Guinea. What really attracted you to New Guinea and these birds in particular? Well, again, it's serendipity so much what I found in my own career. I have friends who have a career that go like clockwork, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, just like that. But I think that's the exception. I think most of us, we wander and we find our way without even knowing or finding our way. And certainly mine was that way. So again, a strange story. My dad, when he was growing up in rural Baltimore, North of Baltimore, he was interested in nature and so were his buddies. One of his buddies was Tom Gileard, who became Mr. New Guinea birds and Mr. Bird of Paradise. So Tom somehow made his way from a little town north of Baltimore to the August American Museum of Natural History in New York and spent his whole career there from an intern to a full curator and he wrote the book on birds of Paradise and he was the co-author of the handbook of New Guinea Birds. So my dad, knowing I was interested in birds, always talked about his buddy Tom Gileard. And we should go up and see Tom in New York. Well, the time we got to New York, unfortunately, Tom had died of a heart attack. But he was always there in my mind and when I had to struggle to figure out a plan to present to the Watson Fellowship people as a senior at college, what am I going to do? What the Watson people wanted, they wanted to give fellowship opportunities to students who, this fellowship opportunity would allow them to take that next leap forward that otherwise they may not be able to do. I think I fit that model because I was essentially an American history major who wrote his honors thesis on birds of the Adirondacks. So I was still doing birds stuff, even though I was American history major, but I wanted to become a legit biologist. So by giving me that chance to try to test myself in New Guinea, they were giving me an opportunity to turn the corner and make that leap into real science, which somehow by the grace of God I did. Very cool. Well, you definitely made that leap and we mentioned that after you finished your PhD, you started working at the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History, worked there for a while and had kind of a different array of a variety of positions working at a lot of different places. So are there maybe any standout memories or experiences that you had at these places that you feel like really had a big impact on your career and got you where you are today? I think this is where we talk about failure and the importance of failure and so much of science is failure and people don't realize that because the article they read on the front page of the New York Times or Washington Post talks about success, of course. So I spent six years on and off at Princeton doing my PhD. I was in a fellowship of young people and I was taught through this fellowship that the job I wanted to get was some professorship at some research university like Stanford, some place like that. Basically, I was taught this is the job that you want. I didn't really know what the job was like. I never had one of those jobs, but that's a pretty narrow field to find a job, actually, believe it or not. So when I started finishing up and started looking for jobs, I applied for a couple of jobs and then I actually got a job working in a museum. So I sort of changed course a little bit. I had been working in basically university research doing behavioral ecology on birds of paradise and then I started working in a museum which is more focused on whole different fields, evolutionary biology, systematics, molecular, other sorts of things, things were evolving back then. So I was starting to be sort of binary in my fields and that's a killer in highly competitive realms where only 100 people apply for a job and only one person gets that job. If you're number two every time, you're just like number one hundred. There's no difference between number two and number one hundred. So I worked for ten years at the Smithsonian which was the happiest years of my life because I did full-time ornithological research, published a lot and worked with a wonderful mentor named Dylan Ripley who was his famous Victorian ornithologist and scientist and museum leader and it was just a wonder to be able to spend time with him. But I was his assistant. I was not on my own career track. How am I going to get myself from an assistantship which was a wonderful assistantship? I was in this wonderful space but I eventually had to grow up. So I continued to apply for jobs in the university realm and in museums but I was always coming in number two or number three or number four. Was that disappointing? Yes. I'd have to come home and tell my wife Carol didn't get the job and we cry a little bit and move on. That was tough, really tough and of course it's part of life and it is failure. You're not taking that next jump that you have been told that you need to take. So I got an opportunity working for a conservation organization, the Wildlife Conservation Society. It wasn't exactly what I wanted to do and I sort of sniffed at the idea because I was a snooty researcher but I took the job and for 30 plus years I did nature conservation and I did science on the side and it was absolutely the best thing that could have happened to me and it wasn't what I wanted but it was what I needed and what it did it was it forced me to retrain myself in a whole series of subfields not only nature conservation but natural resource economics and politics and all these different fields and it took me to 35 different countries for my job. I traveled to 35 different countries doing work. Oh wow. And it gave me this broad experience in the world and I'm just thinking back that sort of the very close call with a job at the Field Museum of Natural History where I would have been a bird person and if I'd done that versus doing what I actually did it and those seven other jobs, my life would have been so different and so much more I think constrained and circumscribed. It would have been a wonderful life I'm sure but much much happier that I failed up front and it forced me to retool myself and to do all these things. I never gave up on being a scientist because it was too much part of my DNA and I loved it too much. So the jobs I had it was always you could do that 20, 30% of the time and your boss wouldn't bad you about it. You published they'd like the fact that you were publishing. For instance, while I was working at the State Department as a natural resource management officer, I published a book on birds of paradise with a co-author. Not many people did that and on and on. After those books that I published, I published while I was actually doing something else. It was what I did at night instead of sleeping, right? I can't do that anymore. About 9 p.m. the computer turns off and I used to be able to work until 10 or 11 but the body's weak. I think you deserve a break at this point so don't feel bad about it. I can work full time during the day so that's true. I'm blessed in that way. That's wonderful. Well, birds, I think these challenges you described will really resonate with a lot of our listeners who are trying to launch their own careers or maybe trying to figure out what direction to go as they think about their next steps. So thanks so much for sharing these stories. Yeah, I don't want to speak directly to those people. Absolutely. Life is complicated and especially when you're young, you have these unitary concepts and you think this is the way it has to be. Just like those physicists and mathematicians working on quantum mechanics, people like Albert Einstein were banging their heads against trying to find a unified field theory you're going to be banging your head against your career and your life and you need to find different ways to move forward. And sometimes you have to move sideways to get forward. It's a matter of stepping back and taking a breath and looking up at the stars, getting a new idea and those great thinkers are those people who are able to step back and get away from the rope thinking and break away and I tip my hats to those people. Remember when Einstein wrote those two papers that got him the Nobel Prize, he was working in the patent office. That wasn't what he wanted to be doing. That was what paid for the milk and the bread and yet he was able to write those papers at night. Absolutely. And I love that you have this message for our listeners because I think so many people almost get that tunnel vision when thinking about their careers that there's one right way to do it. They need to be that top tier research university academic scientist, but there are so many different career paths out there that are worth exploring. There are more and more and actually during my career, I can remember it is clear as day. There was a letter written by some colleagues, including Jared Diamond, John Turborg, E.O. Wilson, several other eminent biologists wrote a letter to science saying, we are hereby initiating a new field and we're calling a conservation biology. This was probably 1982. I remember I was house sitting at Henry Warren's house, a biologist at Princeton. I was his live in babysitter and I was reading the science before dinner and I read this and I was saying, I'll be damned if I'm going to become a conservation biologist because I was young and I was a graduate student and I didn't want to take any chances with real science versus a brand new field that just came out of nowhere. Sounds phony. Yeah, right. This is not real. And of course today conservation biology, not only do we have conservation biologists and esteemed professors of conservation biology, a new field came from that and it's called conservation. Pure conservation is now considered a science. So things change and it's often hard to anticipate how quickly the world alters. That's quite remarkable. So we need to be flexible. Absolutely. And we don't just want to talk about some of the challenges you've encountered in your career, but I'd love to talk about some of your successes as well. So do you have a favorite success story you'd like to share with us today? Yeah. I guess there's a single field trip to New Guinea I took in the year 2000. 2005 and it took 37 years. I started thinking about this field trip back in 1977. Oh, wow. And I talked about it with Dylan Ripley, my mentor then. I was a summer fellow at the Smithsonian and Dylan Ripley, who was the secretary at the time. He was the big boss, famous ornithologist who had worked in New Guinea and we made this plan to go to the FOIA mountains of New Guinea. And Jared Diamond had recently, no, he hadn't been there yet. So we knew that he wanted to go there. And even though Jared was a mentor of mine as well, also competitor, we were both working on birds of New Guinea. He hadn't finished up his work there. In fact, Jared is still working on the birds of New Guinea. That's phenomenal. Well, he still goes there every year or every other year, I believe. Really? Is in his 70s. Wow. Anyway, this FOIA mountains, Dylan Ripley had tried to get there as an ornithologist in 1962. And it was just too difficult. It's a small mountain range, but very isolated. There are no hiking trails. The local communities don't hunt up there. But we thought this was a place where there was a lost Bauer bird called the Golden Fronted Bauer Bird. And there was also this lost bird of paradise called Berlefsch's Six-Wired Bird of Paradise. These two fantastic birds had been described as science from some unknown location in New Guinea. They had arrived in England in these collections of feathers that the collectors collected the feathers to make money, of course. Either indigenous people or traders, Dutch or other traders. These were feathers for ladies' hats because between 1890 and 1900, every fashionable lady wanted to have some beautiful feather in her cap, as they say. In this case, it was often whole birds, a whole bird of paradise, or dozens of hummingbirds in their hats. Oh, wow. That was great for the ladies. Not so great for the birds, but it was good for science. Sure. The reason is the smart scientists and naturalists said there may be some interesting birds in these shipments of feathers coming for the ladies' hats. So they'd get first dibbies looking through these large collections coming from New Guinea and the Far East. And they'd find these things. They'd find new species in these boxes of birds. Now since these birds were actually collected for hats and not for science, often they came without any labels. So scientists would get these specimens. They'd describe them as new to science and they'd have to say, well, we don't know where they came from. And for this Bauer bird and these bird of paradise, there was a 50-year race to find where these two birds came from. And Jared won the first race. In 1982, he actually, with one other person, hiked up into the FOIA mountains and found the Bauer bird. And that made a cover of science. He kept a good secret about that. And I remember seeing the picture on the cover. He said, yeah, he won. That's so cool. But there was still the bird of paradise. And it wasn't until 2005 that we got back to the FOIA mountains and we found and we photographed the display of that bird of paradise. And we actually found that it was a distinct species. And of course, we also spent time with the wonderful Bauer bird too and photographed and filmed that. And we also found another hundred new species, plants and animals there. That's incredible. And that sounds completely crazy. Yeah. Actually, because most of the animals and plants on earth have not been described as science fewer than a quarter, maybe fewer than a tenth of the animals and plants in the world have name. So when you go to a place that's as isolated as the FOIA mountains, many of the things you're going to bump in, especially at the sort of lower taxonomic levels are undescribed. So people are still describing those species that we encountered back in 2005. And we know there are many, many, many other species up in that mountain range still to be described. So to be able to go to a place that only Jared Diamond's been to, it's pretty darn amazing. And we went there four times. We had teams from the Smithsonian and Conservation International and Partners institutions in Indonesia went up there really risking our lives because it was very, very iffy. We were sort of on the edge of the earth there because you're at the edges of supplies and getting in and you can only get there by helicopter. You couldn't actually, when I said Jared Hikeden, he was able to helicopter up to a clearing and then hike up further. You needed a helicopter to get this big chunk from the first village to that six or seven day walk. You needed to do that by helicopter. And helicopters are great if you're in Arizona. It's dry no wind. Yeah, there's no wind. There's no cloud. There's no fog. There's no rain. On the top of the FOIA mountains, clouds are usually sitting there. The first time we went up there, I was in the helicopter with one other person and some equipment and you get up there and we had satellite imagery of where we wanted to land. There's this clearing, this bog that is an opening in the forest. Well, the bog is covered in fog. So you just have to buy your time in the helicopter. You just basically twiddling your thumbs, right? Getting progressively more nervous. Yeah. Because what the people say in New Guinea is every cloud has a granite lining, whether you're in a bush plane or a helicopter, you don't want to fly into a cloud because you don't know what's on the backside of that cloud. Sure. And there are plenty of friends, biologists, ornithologists who found that out the hard way, who are no longer with us. So it's not a joke. We all thank heavens. We all came back alive, but we had some close calls there, but it was all worth it. So that's almost a Victorian story and it's almost natural history rather than science. But to be able to get out there on the edge and experience things that very few other people have experiences, pretty exciting. Absolutely. I think just the sense of adventure and exploration that you're describing going somewhere where so few people have gone and discovering one to 200 new species. That is just incredible. I'll tell you one other fun story of discovery. It involves a student, a bi named Jack Dumbacher, who's now a curator of birds and mammals at the Cal Academy of Sciences in San Francisco. So Jack was with me working with me in New Guinea in a little park called Barry Rada just outside of Port Mores. This is the opposite of the FOIA Mountains. This is a place I set up working in there because my wife was about to have a baby and I wanted to be able to go to a place where we could bring the baby. Oh, yeah. Well, that was totally nuts. Taking a baby to New Guinea, we found out firsthand is totally nuts. That's why I set up a project working in this little tiny park. Very reasonable. We had a 45 minute drive in a car on a paved road. So I set up there and we were working on birds of paradise in this little park. So the first season my wife came with the little baby grace, disastrous. No. It was raining the whole time. She never actually saw, and of course Grace didn't either. But Carol, my wife never actually saw the birds I was working on because really the trails were so slippery and slick because of the rain. It was only like a two mile walk to the birds where they display in their tree. But carrying a baby is very difficult and she spent her whole time in a tent. Oh, and Dawn, I'd say, honey, I'll see you at lunch. So I'd come back at lunch. She's still in the tent. And also she was worried about malaria. Right. That was season one. She said, I'm not coming back for season two. You can go with Jack and some other kids or whatever, but that's okay. I'll stay home. Anyway, Jack got to the field site and he was banding birds. We were trying to color band these rogiana birds of paradise. He got there and it had some me for some reason. I had some other chores I had to do back in the US. So he got there set up with a team of volunteer students and they captured some birds, common birds. They let them go. They lit their hand that night after they'd handled these birds and their lips went numb. So this was Jack, a Nicholas Walberg who was actually a high school student at the time of Scandinavian high school student. His dad worked for UNDP, United Nations Development Program in Port Moresville. And the two of them separately poisoned themselves by handling something. At first they thought it might be a poison ivy type thing and they got together a couple of nights before I got there and they sort of compared notes. What did you do today to get this, whatever it is? This is our substance on your hand. And they both had handled a family of hooded pitahoeys they'd catch. We were trying to catch birds of paradise which were very hard to net. But the hooded pitahoeys, the commonest bird in the forest there. So we're always getting these darn pitahoeys which are perfectly nice birds. They look a little bit like a Baltimore royal black head, black wings, black tail orange body. Perfectly nice bird turns out they're toxic. They're chemically defended. And Jack and Nicholas were able to put this together. So the day before I got to this field site, they caught a pitahoe and they licked it. Really? I don't think I would do that. I'm not that adventurous. And they poisoned themselves. So it's very much like Novakaine or Prokaine. So they licked it and their tongue and their lips went tingled and became completely numb. And they said, well, we've figured out this bird is an interesting bird. And so of course the night I arrived, we changed our research project. We sent a message to the National Geographic Society who was our funder. So we will now be working on the world's first chemically defended bird. That was pretty darn exciting piece of work. The Jack is still working on for part of his career. Well, that is phenomenal. I love these stories that you're sharing. And we mentioned that you've been to so many places for your work, 35 different countries. And I think the ability to travel for your work is a phenomenal opportunity in science. And I love sharing some of these travel stories with our listeners so they can really appreciate the global nature of science. So do you have a favorite place that you've been to or a travel story from one of them? Well, first I want to interject with one of the things I sort of looking back on my career last year. I said, well, I've actually worked with a lot of different people. So I went through my publication list and I did a calculation of how many different people of co-authored papers or books with and how many countries they come from. And it even amazes me. 81 collaborating authors from 15 countries. Oh, wow. I'm going to privilege to be able to communicate with our fellow humankind across the globe like that with all those people from all those different countries. It's absolutely fantastic. And every new country I've visited has been a revelation and it's been a pleasure and it's been so much nicer and so much more exciting than I thought it would be. I was expected to be disappointed. And it was always the opposite. And the people of those countries that I visited, I was apprehensive because maybe I didn't speak their language or maybe I didn't understand their cultures or maybe I was a little bit worried about their religion or something like that. The people were so welcoming, so hospitable. I can only hope that we as Americans are as hospitable to visitors to our country as those people were to me when I visited those countries. It was absolutely fantastic. So I'm going to give you an opposite answer. I haven't been to a country where I haven't felt welcome and I haven't discovered something new about the world and I haven't felt privileged to go to. Yeah, I've been uncomfortable. I've been put in house arrest. Really? Wow. That's inconvenient. I've gotten sick, but virtually every place I've gone has been much better than I expected. So I have to ask, you mentioned the house arrest when was this and where? Okay. It was an Indonesian New Guinea and Western New Guinea. That's where the FOIA mountains were. Some parts of the world we are essentially not welcome. There's no question about it. Western New Guinea, which has over the years, was first called West Papua, was called initially Dutch New Guinea and then it became Indonesia and it became Irian Jaya. Now it's two provinces. It's called Papua and West Papua and that's the Western half of New Guinea. But we're still not welcome there. If you try to get a visa today, if you just say, oh, I want to go on a bird toward a Western New Guinea. If you go to the embassy here in Washington and ask for a visa to go there to go bird watching, they will not give you one. That means you're not welcome there. But in fact, there is no stricture. You can go. You just have to find your way around that. So there's a giant copper and gold mine called Freport Mine next to the highest mountain in New Guinea, which is one of the big eight, one of the highest mountains on Earth. It's called Pujak Jaya or Carsten's Peak that has permanent snow on it. It's one of those equatorial glacier mountains. It's around 15,000 feet high. And right on the side of it, right near the summit is this giant reserve of gold, Lieberton Eye, which is pretty sad for that mountain. And Freport Company built this road all the way up together this golden copper from that mine and two different ore bodies. And I went to visit that mine so I could work along that elevational transect because they had a road that went from sea level from the coast all the way to 14,500 feet, which is this fantastic transect where you could sort of look at birds and rainforest along that transect. Otherwise, doing it in the forest itself would take essentially months or years. Right. To make it up the elevation. Yeah. So the mine, it's American-based mine. They were okay with me coming. But the Indonesian police and military, they didn't like having Americans to sort of wandering around. And we did not, I guess, do the due diligence in terms of letting the police and the military know that we were just birdwatchers looking at birds, relatively harmless. And they saw us wandering the road and they sent a signal saying whoever those two white looking guys are. Aprehen them. Yeah, they're not allowed on the road anymore. This is our road. It's not your road. This was Indonesia, not America. And they'll be welcome to birdwatch within the compound of this city they'd built on the side of the mountain, Agapura, Coppertown, as it's seven and a half thousand feet. So the next seven days while we were there instead of wandering the road and getting these wonderful observations, we had to watch birds from within this like a prison camp because we were behind a big fence with barbed wire. It was keeping us in. So that was pretty frustrating. In later years, we were able to go and in fact, the mine actually helped us get our helicopter that got us to the foyer mountains. So things worked out better later on. But we were pretty frustrated then. Absolutely. Well, this is an incredible story. Like I said, and I really like that in talking about some of your travel experiences you hinted at just some of the amazing people you've been able to work with looking back at some of your collaborations and the teams that you're with on the ground there. And I think the people are a wonderful part of science. So are there any, I guess, quirky traditions or fun or funny memories that you've shared with colleagues that you think really show this human side of science that the world doesn't often get to see? Well, I'm not sure. I'm going to tell you a little story and it probably won't fit. But I think it's a fun story. We're all sort of comrades and arms and we pulled together. But when we got off that helicopter on the foyer mountains and that bog, five and a half thousand feet up on that little mountain range in Western New Guinea, there were two scientists onboard that first trip when we jumped out of the helicopter. The helicopter pilot refused to touch down. He said, I don't know what's under there. It could be quick sand. It says, you guys can jump out and find out. So we did. It was Chris Heldgen and myself. Chris Heldgen, an eminent mammologist who's an expert on mammals of the world. So Chris and I jumped out into the bog and he found a new species of bird within ten minutes. And I found a new species of giant rat. And actually, it's not as fun as it sounds. I found a skull sitting on a little tough to boss. That was a skull of what became a new species of giant rat, this huge rat that weighs five kilograms. Oh, geez. We were just killing time waiting for the rest of the crew to shuttle up. And he was just working the edge of the bog. This is a bird and vegetation along there. And he saw this bird with his bright red facewaddle and his dangling like jowls. And we came back and quickly compared notes and I said, look here for you, a skull. And of course, a mammologist loves skulls because that's how they identify the species as by the teeth and the dentition and the osteology of the skull. So he was like on cloud nine. He said, I just saw this bird with these waddles. I said, oh, maybe that's the waddled plow bill because there's actually a bird in New Guinea. Believe it or not, called the waddled plow bill. I love it. But he described it and was something else. It turned out to be a bird that I named after my wife, Carol. Carol swaddled. No, that's not what it's called, but it's not the most beautiful bird in the world, but it's a cool bird. And it was fun to be able to sort of flip flop and have the mammologists find the bird and have the ornithologist find the mammal. So stranger things have happened. Well, that is amazing. I love it. And it's the top accounts. But what I'll tell you about ornithologists and natural scientists, people who study wildlife and nature in the field, is they love beer and they love hanging out. And as graduate students, we hung out, we drank beer and we played foosball, the nerf ball shooting that nerf ball. The highlight of the year would be twice a year actually we'd have double blind beer tasting parties where you'd bring your favorite beer and your unfavered beer and then of course they'd all be putting numbered cups and you'd vote which is the best beer and which is the worst beer. And invariably the people who were sure that their favorite beer, some fancy yuppie beer like Heineken or something, they would rate that the lowest and it would be some crappy really cheap rot gut beer like iron city or whatever schmitz that they would rank more highly. Oh, that's awesome. And that was a really great scientific experiment. That's one of science's breaking preconceptions. The earth is flat. The earth is flat. You need to do an experiment to prove that it's not. And this beer is good. This beer is good. No, it's not. You like it because of the label and because of the expense. Take away the biases. Yeah, right? Yeah. It's very, very humbling. Yeah. And that's a big, big part of science too is being humble. Well, I love that you took a scientific approach to this beer tasting. I think that is awesome. Oh, absolutely. I learned a lot. Well, we've talked about some of the work you've done in the past Bruce. Is there a project that you're currently working on or maybe have recently completed that you want to tell us a little bit more today about that you're just really excited about? I'm really excited about two things. So one involves the past and one involves the future. So one involving the past is me and two colleagues, Thane Pratt and Steve Proid Jones. All three of us did our PhD dissertations on a mountain in Eastern New Guinea, a mountain called Mount Missum. And this is a mountain that Herbert Stevens and naturalist first visited in 1931. And he collected a big, beautiful bird collection there that I first studied when I was at Harvard preparing to go to New Guinea. The number of other biologists have worked on that mountain over the years. And the plan with my colleagues is to put together all this information and this sort of synthesis of the birds and rainforest of this single mountain in New Guinea. It'll be one of these best known spots. It'll become a benchmark for future research where we have tens of thousands of data all compiled for this one single place that's still there, of course. So scientists, researchers, students can still go back there. So it's just the very beginning plans of pulling all these tens of thousands of days or hundreds of thousands of data together on tree distributions, on bird distributions, on climate and putting that all together in this one monograph on Mount Missum. So that's sort of an old fashioned project, but what it's going to be great is this baseline product that future research can refer back to. As we know, our earth is changing and always has been changing and we are more and more interested, self-interested in those changes, especially with the climate side, that I'm thinking this is going to be a really nice contribution to future research. What happens so much data, it never gets published, it never gets put in the common wealth, people can't get access. It just gathers dust somewhere and very, very difficult. It becomes harder and harder to unearth as each year goes by. If we can put it together, we will be making this contribution to future research. In terms of actually moving forward, I have hung up my boots for New Guinea. I don't go overseas anymore. I've made this declaration to myself. I do all my work in the United States and Canada and I'm focusing on the opposite of tropical rainforest, which is boreal conifer forest. It's very, very simple. It's a place, instead of 200 species in an acre, it has six or seven species of trees in an acre. Instead of 300 species of birds, it only has 30 species of birds. I'm going to be looking at the boreal forest. It's the great north woods, looking at the relationship between these permanent resident birds who live there, year round, rain, snow, sleet, or whatever. It's very, very Spartan and seer boreal forests that are spruces and furs and tamaracts and cedars. A few deciduous trees thrown in and basically getting a grip on how these birds manage to live there year round. That's my future field project that I'm looking forward to starting this summer. Very cool. These both sound really exciting projects, both this comprehensive evaluation of Mt. Missum and digging into the American boreal forest and what's going on with the resident birds there. Very cool. They'll keep me busy. Yeah. You'll never be able to officially retire, I think. They're going to keep me out of trouble till a rock hits me on the head or a coconut or something. Well, now we talked about some of the big questions that you're planning to answer. And I'm curious, Bruce, if we gave you all the resources you could possibly dream of, all the funding, all the staff, all the technology, all the feasibility restrictions, not a problem, what is the one question that you are most curious about and would want to answer? This is one of the great unanswered questions. I was with the expert on this issue, this scientific issue yesterday, Martin Workelski. I happened to attend a symposium about bird migration and the conservation of bird migration systems yesterday at the National Geographic Society. It was hosted by the NGS and the Cornell Lab of Ornithology and the National Audubon Society. And the amazing thing is they rolled out all this fantastic technology that had evolved satellites. They launched a new satellite just two days ago that has an antenna for following cranes migrating in Europe. They actually have the wherewithal to get their own antenna in the sky looking down at migrating birds. So the high-tech stuff is fantastic. They still have not answered how a Canada warbler finds the spruce tree that it puts its nest in every year when it migrates north from the tropics. It heads up into Ontario into a patch of boreal forest and it gets back to that same patch of boreal forest where it was born. And we know a lot about how it gets most of the way and what it does because Workelski actually put radios on swains and swans and swathees and actually followed them from the coast of Texas all the way up into Canada. But actually once it gets up into Canada up at that right latitude, how does it find the right meridian? Because I just wrote a book about this issue about spring migration. The book I just published last week, which I guess I need to mention is called North on the Wing. That book laments the fact that we really don't know how the bird gets that final 50 miles, how it actually gets back to the tree it was born in. And I asked Martin yesterday, I said, you must know now you've got all this high-tech stuff. What's the secret? Yeah. And he said, hey buddy, remember science, nature, things are complicated. We there's still lots and lots and lots and things we don't understand. And that's definitely one of them. So that would be one that I would love to be able to be part of a team that answered that seemingly simple question. But one that involves geography and magnetism and polarized light and ultraviolet light. There's so many factors and cues, but how does it do it? We don't know. That is remarkable. I don't know that I could find the same tree even with all the technology you just mentioned, right? Exactly. We know sometimes they don't find it. Sure. That's okay. But the technology is sloppy. Right. So there's some slop in the system. And sometimes the tree's not there anymore. That's not their fault. Oh, let's not talk about that. That's the whole conservation story. We won't open that egg this time. That is a Pandora's box, especially for the boreal forest. Well, wonderful to hear about these big questions that remain unanswered within your field listeners. These are, like we said, so many opportunities out there to answer some of these questions as we move forward in the field in the future. And thinking about our listeners, scientific journeys, is there any piece of advice for readers that you received at some point in your own career that you think would be really helpful for our listeners to hear? Work on what you love and pursue what you love. This is really more at the career level. I can remember my dad saying, son, life is tough. Be a doctor, get rich, then you can study birds in your retirement. And being a kid, not listening to his dad, I said, thanks dad. And instead, somehow, stumble along and pursue my passion, which was birds, and it led me to, I think, a more interesting place. So I'm recommending all those young scientists to be, follow your passion. Wonderful advice, and I'm glad you didn't listen to your dad way back then. Me too. Is there any other last piece of advice or a last note of inspiration you want to leave our listeners with today, Bruce? Look outside. Remember what Stephen Hawking said? Look up at the stars at night. Take appreciation from the little things. They're wonders in our backyard that we tend to take for granted. We should not take them for granted. They're the things that in moments of vulnerability and weakness, those are the things can give us strength and give us joy and give us repose and help us to take stock and to move ahead. Excellent. Well, listeners, definitely take this to heart, try and take some time and get outside and enjoy the beautiful sunshine today. And Bruce, can you tell our listeners if they want to learn more about you and the work that you do? Where should they go? I have a website. I don't know what it is. So you can find that website. If you just Google me, if you put in Bruce Beeler, researcher, lecturer, something will pop up that will get you to my website. And also there are other websites that have nice stuff about me. So it's right there. He's easily Googleable. I can attest to this. If someone wants to send me a message, I'd welcome that. That would be at beelerbeatsi.edu. Perfect. Well, listeners, definitely check out more about what Bruce is working on and get in touch if you have any questions. And Bruce, thank you so much for joining us on the program today. It's been a delight to chat with you and listeners wonderful to have you here as well. We'll see you next time on another episode of People Behind the Science.