 Hey everyone and thanks for joining me today for episode 789 of People Behind the Science. I'm your host, Dr. Marie McNeely, and today I'll be joined by our guest, Dr. Keringa Alaroup, to talk about life and science. I hope you enjoy getting a behind-the-scenes look into the life and experiences of another researcher in today's episode. And if you want to meet even more of today's scientists, you can check out our website at peoplebehindthecience.com or subscribe to our show on your favorite podcast platform. And today Keringa is going to share some of her own insights and stories, so get ready to meet another one of our wonderful. People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to People Behind the Science. Today I am thrilled to be speaking with our guest scientist, Dr. Keringa Alaroup. Keringa, thank you so much for joining us on the show today. How are you? Thank you. They're good. Well, thank you so much for joining us and I'm looking forward to learning more about you and your work in our conversation today, but perhaps we'll start with a little bit of background. Listeners, Keringa is a professor in the Department of Molecular, Cell, and Systems Biology, and Director of the Center for Infectious Disease Invector Research at the University of California Riverside. She received her bachelor's degree in biochemistry and microbiology from the University of Paris, Herbond. Her master's degree in host parasite interactions in a joint program between Oxford University and the Pasture Institute at Lille. And she received her PhD in parasitology and host parasite interactions from the University of Paris, Herbond. Afterwards, Keringa conducted post-doctoral research at the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, and subsequently, she was an institute fellow at the Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation. Keringa joined the faculty at UCR in 2006, and she has earned various awards and honors throughout her career, including the Academic Senate Region Award for Outstanding Research from the University of California, and she was a participant in the Provost Faculty Leadership Program at UCR and the University of California's Women's Initiative for Professional Development. And today, Keringa, we're excited to get to know you as a scientist, of course, but also get to know you more as a person. So, can you start by telling us what do you like to do when you're not doing science? So, I first would like to thank you for the invitation. I'm really happy to talk to you right now. So, what do I do when I don't do science? I take care of my son, and I go to see him playing soccer, but I also love sailing and skiing. So, if I have a bit of time, I'm vulnerable for myself. I go sailing and I'm waiting in San Diego Bay or in winter time, I also enjoy skiing a lot. That sounds wonderful. I actually enjoy outside activity and getting a bit of fresh air to admit that my work is often very important to be able to disconnect, to think better. Absolutely. I think getting away from the computer screens and the fluorescent lights can go a long way to clearing your head. Well, I'd love to talk about your scientific side as well. So, how do you describe your work and your research to someone who's not in science or perhaps does not in your particular field? So, I've been trained as a scientist, but I only became excited about the work I was doing when I started working as an intern in the lab in England working on parasites. I start working on parasites and affecting young kids in Africa and worms transmitted by Snell. This parasite was called a Shistuzama Monsonnii, and I become really passionate by this life cycle of this very complex parasite that can infect a human around the world. And then I've always been really excited to actually focus on this parasite that usually infect people in developing countries that don't have easy access to health and medicine. And working for this population is definitely really exciting and rewarding for me. So, today I worked on mostly on the human malaria parasites that's affecting over 200 million people annually and can kill up to 600,000 people, mostly kids on the five. And my main work is really to try to better understand the parasite life cycle, how all of these molecular components inside the parasite work together, and how we can disrupt the parasite inside the human body and find new beings who cure kids infected by these parasites and that lead to the disease. In junior, I want people to say no. I have a certain tendency to actually love going against these people saying no, you cannot do it and love to demonstrate that yes, you can if you're highly motivated and consistent and hard working, you can actually do what you've always been dreaming doing. So, the assistance and hard work is my way of motivating me, in fact. I love that. I think it can go a long way in science. You really have to be persistent and motivated and it can take time to learn this process as a scientist. So, when you look back over the course of your career, are there particular mentors or role models or people who really helped you learn the ropes and get to where you are today? I think it's very important to make sure you meet the right people and to make sure these people are giving you confidence. So, when I actually decided because I'm French, I was born in France, but I was okay at university, but but very passionate by what I was working on and decided to learn how to speak English. If I wanted to be a scientist, I had to learn how to speak English and decided to move to the UK and North Wales to learn science, to learn the work at the bench, but also to learn English and I ended up in a lab with a willing great scientist that was extremely supportive and for the first time in my old career, starting to talk to me as a real person. I have learned in disability and dyslexic, so it was always very challenging, always had to work much harder than most of the people around me, but having someone that looked at me for the first time as a real person and did believe in me and was always giving me some encouragements and positive feedback was actually really important for me. And also, of course, became passionate about this parasite and the fact that I was working for kids in developing country. But yeah, you always receive a lot of negative feedback, deception, rejection, and very often, especially as women in science, people keep telling you that you cannot do it, that you cannot achieve it. And meeting some of these nice and supportive people around your way can make a huge difference. Absolutely. And I think meeting these mentors can completely change a career trajectory in some cases. And you mentioned that you perhaps had a change of heart that shifted you towards this area of parasitology, but could you rewind back even farther, Korean and tell us what first got you interested in science at all? It's mostly because I was dyslexic. I couldn't write anything. It was very challenging, but I liked molecule. And I always thought, okay, if you have a hard time writing, maybe if you become a scientist and deal with molecules and atoms and carbons, then it's going to be easier for you to actually demonstrate to the people that you're not that stupid. So it started like that by trying to avoid as long as possible to write something. And the funny part is now because I have to write grants, I spend all my life and all my time to write grant and manuscript and publications. But initially, I just wanted to avoid writing and really focus on small molecule. Very interesting. And I think this can be challenging for people out there who are listeners who might have a disability themselves, whether it's dyslexia or something else where they feel like science isn't accessible to them as a career path. Do you have any advice or things that help you kind of in those initial stages when you were starting to get excited about science and things that kept you from feeling discouraged about the career? Yeah, I always feel discouraged. I always felt that it was impossible, but I also had some really amazing supporting parents that were always behind me and always supporting my work and telling me and repeating to me that I was capable of doing it. It's not because you have learning disability that you cannot achieve your dreams. You just have to work harder and also to learn how to work and try to avoid the issue by finding ways to work better using different tools basically. So for me, it was focusing on molecules and I guess for some other, it's finding a picture or reading a loudly. So I think you have to find your motivation and the way to improve your learning abilities. I think that's helpful to think about these tools and strategies that you can leverage to really move forward. And I think it sounds like this internship that you had in England was sort of a pivotal moment for you. Can you talk us through what brought you to that point to that internship and what was it about parasitology that really captured your interest? So yeah, definitely this internship in the laboratory of Mike Duner, in Bangor, North Wales was really important for my life and my career. It was a Erasmus exchange program. So this university and scientific program exchange organized by the Open Community. And I met not only an amazing mentor that supported me but also a lot of other young scientists like me coming from all over the world and giving me the opportunity to see the world and to open to the world as a world. Not only as a French student but as an international student and also looking at other aspects of science and the fact that there is plenty of problem all over the world that can be solved if you think a bit outside the box. So it's not only concern, it's not only in originative disease disorder but there is also still plenty of disease in the world that is problematic for a lot of people. And then yeah, this parasite is amazing. They change all their transmitted by other snail and mosquitoes or ticks. They change shape, they change form and they can adapt to so many different conditions. And all that I really was interested in and trying to understand how and why, how they were adapting and how they could survive and how we can actually find new treatment to fight these disease. I think that's phenomenal. So it sounds like your heart was set at that point in pursuing a career doing research in this area. What were the steps that you took then to ultimately get you to your current position? So after this internship which I highly advise young students to actually travel the world and see what's in the world and test different lab and different educational system, I really was motivated to really focus my career on pathetology. So apply for a pathetology graduate program, master program between University of the Leland Oxford and did a master when you're in Europe, you first have to do a master special in France before you can start your PhD. So I applied to different master program was accepted of course because I had already training, I was able to speak English by that time. And I've been a lot of working on another type of parasite, fungus affecting the length of immunosuppression called pneumocystiscarinii. And the mocystiscarinii is the parasite, the fungus that helped scientists to discover HIV. And when I was working in this lab in the early to mid 90s, AIDS patient was still a huge problem and pneumocystiscarinii and generating this large pneumonia in HIV patient was still a significant issue. So here again I was excited to work on the pathogen that was still at that time killing a huge amount of patients infected with HIV. So it sounds like this was a particularly meaningful project and you were able to take these different steps then what ultimately brought you to Riverside. So you mentioned you did this master's program, what happened next? The mocystiscarinii was an interesting parasite but extremely complicated to work with. As of today we still cannot go the parasite in culture. So for someone really interested in molecular aspect of the parasite, it was difficult to work with this parasite and with the advance of three therapy, AIDS patients were surviving much longer and pneumocystis was not as problematic as it used to be in the early 80s or early 90s. So I was extremely motivated to pursue my career in parisitology and decide to actually pick up the parasite that was still one of the most infecting agent in the world and decide to go for malaria and chasmodempharsipum which is one of the number one infectious disease killer in the world with tuberculosis and HIV. And as of today I'm still working on the human malaria parasite. I did my PhD on it so back in France, trying to understand cell cycle and cell cycle regulation focusing on kinases and kinase inhibitor. Then I moved to a script research institute and work with Professor Elizabeth Winsler. There we developed my career at technology. It was a very exciting time in the history of science because we had early access to genomic information, more genomic information and started to do a bit more functional genomics and developed with the first macrari experiments to start to understand which transcriptroise express a different time of the parasite life cycle to find out how the parasite was controlling its development and progression into different host and different stage of the disease in human. Well that's really interesting and then I know next we mentioned in our introduction you move to the genomics institute of the Novartis Research Foundation and this has maybe a little bit different from your traditional academic postdoc experience. Can you describe what it was like working there? Yeah that time I just was unsure if I really wanted to stay in academia or if I wanted to work in industries so working at the dynamic institute of the Novartis Research Foundation was a perfect combination to see if I really wanted to pursue my career in industry in academia and I worked officially there for two years, developed the malaria drug discovery program together with Elizabeth Winsler and then decided that it was not for me. Decided that I really liked trying to develop drug screening and setting up the screening for millions of molecules but I was more interested in how and why. I was more interested in a mechanistic understanding of how the parasite will survive inside a human body or mosquito specter. So I decided very quickly that the industry was one interesting was definitely not for me because I had many many and answer questions that I wanted to answer myself and decided quickly to actually apply for academia position and that's how I moved to University of Cali-Rothonia Riverside between 2005 and 2006 to develop my own lab and to develop a lot of new technology to do a bit more advanced functional genomics and better understand the parasite life cycle progression. Wonderful, Karine, I know you are doing some really cool research in your lab today so for listeners out there who aren't familiar with your work can you share with us what is a project that you are working on right now that you were just the most excited about. It's difficult to actually cite one project because I have more than one project that I'm very excited about. I have a project that are more focused on easy science again understanding the why and how where we try to understand a mechanism of epigenetic and combat in structure so how the parasite regulate is gene regulation for its developmental progression. So this is for me really exciting because I develop a new tool, a new platform to understand how the parasite survive and which molecular component is essential for the parasite to survive inside and there is another aspect of my research and we recently published a paper in science where we also still do a bit of drug screening and I focus on natural product to identify new compound and new medicine against the human malaria parasite. So we start with natural product. I screen a lot of those. We also worked in collaboration with chemists where we try to simplify a lot this natural product to make the components more efficient but also easier to sanitize and cheaper because that's the main issue. When you work with a tropical disease, when you work with disease that affect people living in developing country you have to make sure that not only you find an efficient new medicine but this medicine is also cheap to produce and can be accessible to most living in this world. So we really do a lot of hard work at the organic chemistry level and then when we have something that we think can do the work, my lab has recently developed a new functional genomic pipeline to take a systems by the the approach to understand the drug mechanism of action of this new drug new medicine new component and figured how this natural product worked and how this product is efficient at killing the human malaria parasite and human and not at killing this its host. I think that's very interesting and I came across your science paper looking at this MAD6189. Can you talk a little bit more about the findings and why this is so significant because I understand that not only does it work but it also has a unique mechanism. So yeah it's derived from a natural product which is always good. Still the most efficient medicine against malaria are derived from natural product. This was one of the first molecule against malaria queenine. We also have Artemisinin that are also derived from a natural product and the advantage of this product is as the parasite take much longer to actually develop drug resistance against this component and the way it's only takes much longer is because I think evolution that's done the work. This natural product that I extracted from plant from trees or from a marine sponges have done the work in trying to find the best way to kill pathogens and affecting the plants or the sponge and there are more complex drug mechanism of action that the parasite take much longer to develop resistance to it. On this MAD6189, it's still a complex molecule to synthesize still a bit expensive to produce but as a unique drug mechanism of action targeting what we call the apicoplast. The apicoplast is a parasite specific organelle. If you can compare you have different organelles in the cell you have the mitochondria in the animal cell and in print you have the chloroplast very important to generate energy but in apicoplexin parasite including clasmodium and malaria parasite you have both mitochondria and apicoplast that are very important in the parasite to synthesize some important metabolite essential for lipidic pathway, vesicular trafficking and without this apicoplast and with this parasite specific organelle the parasite cannot survive and this new drug new derived natural product made 6189 target this parasite specific so it's definitely not toxic for the human ears because this compound cannot target the human but target something that's parasite specific. Another need target this several protein inside this organelle but it also target the vesicular trafficking so the molecular component that are essential for the biogenesis of this organelle so a complex drug mechanism of action but it's very very difficult for the parasite to evolve resistance mechanism because it's targeting more than one protein and more than one metabolic pathway. Okay, I think this research is absolutely fascinating and you can just start dreaming now I think of the potential impacts of this line of work that you're doing but I think not every day in science is full of great discoveries and successes I think as we alluded to earlier there are challenges struggles failures along the way that most people often don't get to see because only those final products are brought to light so do you have a story of a challenge that you faced or a struggle or a big failure that you can tell us about today and kind of walk us through how you got through that tough time. Yeah, I mean success can only happen because of repetition of a high number of failure and projection so you only see the good part of this project but this was used and used of hard work years of years of rejection when you actually write grant application to fund a project very often you get rejected so again consistency persistence and then very often you take this rejection in a personal way and you should not you should realize that they've reached successful scientists face and face many many rejection failure and you have to repeat over and over again I think externally discovery really come from a high repetition of ordinary experiments that fail and fail and then you have to repeat over and over again and adapt you research a bit more each time and find a way to success but yeah hard work persistence and motivation definitely said perhaps to give us a sense of scale do you remember how many years it took for this project to get to this point where you had a really exciting result to share it took more than eight years oh wow eight to ten years and then often I have some of my colleagues those have but how can you be so successful on our well before my first grant was funded and my first project was funded it took me seventy seven zero ground application to find a successful and to find a new so hard to go to seventy rejection oh my goodness the funny thing is you don't get used to rejection you actually don't get used to failure the only thing that may change you usually mad and depressed for a day or two instead of being depressed for a week or months and then you quickly forget or try to forget and then go back to your lab go back to your computer and start over again I think I really if I have one advice to give to young scientists don't be desperate and just keep trying again and again and again and even if you get a rejection ever and if you get no just come back and be persistent well I think that's such an important message and I think important for people to realize that no matter what stage of your career you're at you are going to get these rejections and it might feel a little bit personal every time but it's just part of the process yeah it's part of the process and it's also part of the success I don't think there is any success without failure and then when you finally manage to make it and you finally get a nice story a nice pepper and a zoolpublish you're really happy you really happy for your but also happy for your team your carabouator you have also to keep in mind that you're not alone I mean this is a large collaboration there is no way you can actually do this work without very strong collaborator during the chemistry the computational analysis I mean you're not alone and the success is really a team success it's not only you but it's a combination of amazing colleague amazing scientist and amazing student to I have a really good student and postdoc that work with me on this project and I have to be thankful to them too definitely in Korean I love this idea of a team success and really celebrating the contributions of each person that because I think you're absolutely right these successes have a long road involved and it's very difficult there a lot of challenges but when you get there I think you need to take a moment to celebrate even if it's just a small victory so we love celebrating these successes on the show and I'm wondering do you have a favorite success story from your career or your research or even just a small but meaningful one that you've had recently that you'd like to tell us about well this recent paper published in science really make me happy because it's a nice story yes it took a long time but I was relieved and happy to show that even if you face difficulties in trying to identify the most complex drug mechanism of action or drug mechanism of resistance if you use a combination of collaborator and team and essays you can actually be successful so the story does not end which is always also good we still have a lot of work to do we still have to find a way to simplify the compounds but yeah this slight moment of success was very very important to me to demonstrate that yes Martin and my collaborator at University of California Riverside can be successful in getting things done and hopefully giving soon a new I mean soon we still have a long time to go but giving an opportunity and hope that we can eventually find new treatments to fight against a positive resistance to all anti-malarial the way I actually tell you what it is I like to invite my friends and have very good food and drink champagne that's also one of the things that I like to know it I should not say that but I like to drink a glass of champagne when I finally reached a success it's always a pleasure to share the success with your colleague and your family and friends that are always there during a time and good time it's not only good time we had plenty of hard time to share too so sharing good moments with your clothes one is also very important moment of your life well I think that is a huge one and I'm glad you took the time to celebrate and I'm also curious I must say you mentioned it took 70 grant applications to get a success how did you celebrate that 71st application that was successful or what was that moment like for you it was a big relief and in a funny way after this success I also managed to finally get pregnant and give birth to my son so it was a combination of a really good vibe and positive energy that also managed to give me the best things that ever happened to me my son so that was a very special moment oh that's wonderful I appreciate you sharing some of these stories of your failures and your successes I think it's a huge part of science and I know some of these successes as well as the failures can motivate you to really dig and deeper in the lab and spend all your time at work but we try to encourage our listeners out there to take a break to read for fun to sort of broaden their mind so do you have a book that you've really enjoyed reading that you can recommend for all of us today whether it's related to science or not Karine I usually read but I read French book Saint-Exupéry is actually one of my favorite authors the Litton Prince which I like a lot and my son is named Antoine for Antoine de Saint-Exupéry I also do a lot of yoga I love yoga I think this is also giving me some peace of mind and allow me to try to relax remove the stress and be able to actually take care of myself and take care of my brain when needed oh I love that well we will definitely add this author recommendation to our website for our listeners to find there and then one of the things we haven't really touched on but is definitely a big part of your career is travel even in talking about your career pathway you've studied at all of these different places and now are of course in the United States from France originally can you talk a little bit about some of your travel experiences and perhaps if you have a favorite place that your science has taken you whether it was for a conference or another purpose I think traveling and the fact that I decided to leave France is the reason why I've been successful I think traveling open your mind and help you realizing that there's far more than just your country and your own little world help also you to accept other culture or other countries or the religion traveling is really important so I will also advise younger students to take a break after your initial study or after your master to actually travel and see the world out there it's inspiring and also help you to understand that you're really really small in these amazing worlds and seeing beauty won't you and different people open your mind and know your heart so traveling has always been an amazing aspect of my life I like traveling to Africa I like traveling to Asia Bali is pretty one of the best islands that I've been to is actually a very small island next to a new caledonia it's called Pine Islands I think it's one of the most beautiful and peaceful places in the world I was there for many many years ago not for work but for pleasure but yeah traveling is a very important aspect to anyone's success and you have to stay on bone and you have to realize that it's not only you there's plenty of people on the world that can actually bring you so much more than what you think well I think you're absolutely right travel can really help put things into perspective and this Pine Island sounds secluded and wonderful do you have a favorite trip that you've been on for science or a favorite place that you've been able to visit for science my favorite meeting is in Woods Hole and a bit north of Boston it's a molecular positive already meeting it's a year it's in September we talk a lot about different parasites plus modium toxoplasma babesia to panosome leshmanyah and I usually meet all of my colleagues once a year and we share our scientific discovery and struggle I'm also a lack to mentor young faculty and let them know that success is not easy and you can do it so there's a lot of things that I like to do outside my lab and meeting your colleague and meeting the especially young faculty and young woman and supporting this young generation is also something that I like to do a lot at the moment. Oh absolutely and I've heard Woods Hole is an absolutely magical place to be talking about science and surrounded by all these people in the field who share your interest what is it like there what was it like when you were there last I was there last just in September just a few weeks ago and I didn't present any data I actually like this meeting because it's mostly student and postdoc presenting and you see the new generation raising and it's just giving you hope for the future and again supporting younger generation and supporting women in science as a woman in science I faced some additional issue when I was younger and I also want to do what I can to avoid this challenge for most of the younger woman and younger generation so giving them support giving them hope and give them the key to success so do not get too depressed by rejection and failure and again persistence and how it will always be the key to success. Definitely and I'm so glad to hear that you're valuing these mentorship experiences and being able to go out there and support the next generation of scientists particularly women in science who are facing a lot of challenges and I think the people who you meet in science are absolutely remarkable whether it's at these small meetings or even in your own department at your university so I think there are stereotypes out there. Karine about what scientists are like that you see in the media on movies and TV but I think so often they're not true a lot of the people that I meet in science are funny creative amazing friendly people and that's not often how we're portrayed so do you have a story or an example that really shows this human side of science whether it's just funnier fond memories or a fun tradition that you had in a lab something like that that kind of goes against the stereotypes that people may have. I know especially at the moment science and and Sancti-star not always valued the way they should but Sancti-star not all of them but it's often very humble and not always indeed boring but I've been often described as a gig but I think we're in general simple and really care about the truth and trying to understand how the world works often doesn't mean to I pay job either but how that it worked and how we can work together on collaborative is yeah I will say collaboration and discussion being open and being humble sometimes when we actually look at the scientific problem and take years to answer a specific question so when you're trying to solve a problem you realize how small you are sometimes but yeah I really like to meet with my student my colleague and support them and yes we usually get also good food and share drinks and a nice story and supporting each other is really something that I appreciate again it's not for everyone there's always some people that are more challenging to deal with than other but in general I will say and I have to say I think the young generation seems to be also more open and more inclusive I will say so I'm happy about that absolutely and I think this collegial collaborative friendly vibe that you're depicting here is against the stereotypes a lot of people think about scientists as these cold very serious always working sort of people so I'm really glad to hear that you've developed this warm and welcoming network of people that you're able to kind of bounce ideas off and work hard towards like you said finding the truth yeah and collaboration I really think that in the past and still when I you are as a young assistant professor people tell me you have to write your own grants alone to show you independence and the type of work that I do are large functional genomic type of studio and you need collaborative you need different type of expertise and you cannot work and work on this large project alone so collaboration between chimis computational biologist MDs and molecular biologist are essentially in our world today and I think the time when I was working alone in his own lab is long gone and I do value collaboration I know there is competition and I have a hard time with competition I'm not great at that I work with people that compete against people so collaboration for me is also key to success definitely I think having the right collaborators can really help you take those important big steps forward in your research and I think oftentimes you're still limited however by different barriers whether it's funding staff technology feasibility or even hours in the day so great if we could give you everything you could dream up is there one particular research question or problem that you would want to address first I still didn't answer my question and how exactly the manaya parasite managed to survive even at the human red blood cell and all of the molecular component that regulate cell development and progression so I'm still working on it and try to do a bit more comparative genomic analysis to analyze what specific to the parasite compared to other epi complex and parasite of course we always need money but time it's going too fast so getting more time and still more support from administration will be amazing oh absolutely I think just having unlimited hours in the day you could accomplish so much and I'm really glad to hear that you're able to work on one of these questions that you are just so passionate about and I think that is a key driver for a lot of people who are working in science today is just they're so excited and curious about the work that they're doing so for our listeners out there who might be on their own scientific journeys or maybe just at a fork in the road in life do you have a piece of advice that you could share with them that perhaps really help do you on your own journey Karine be proactive go and talk to people meet with scientists and ask them to do an internship ask them to mentor you so go out in the world and leave your phone behind and leave your connect world behind and go and start and talk to people and open your eyes and don't be afraid of failure well I love that advice I particularly like the leave your phone behind I think it's so easy to feel glued to that watching these emails pop up and just multiply in your inbox but just really disconnecting and being in the moment and connecting with other people around you I think is something none of us do enough I love talking to people I think when you talk to people you came up with new idea new solution a new problem also that's why I love going to meetings and and learning from other people because if you stay on your own if you stay in front of your screen and if you stay in your office alone I don't think you're going to make huge progress today and especially with AI it's a very often scary what's going to happen in the next few years but I think connection talking to people becoming excited and traveling and looking at the world problem today in the eyes of other is really important similar to you know you have to talk to people in your lab you have to talk to your collaborator but it's also very important and university to talk to the staff I think that's my major issue today we lose this connection we lose this social interaction I mean I can only be happy if I am actually meeting and talking to people and I think this has also be a key to my success going forward meeting people talking to people and eventually thinking a bit more to myself and getting this feedback and getting new ideas well I think that is a wonderful message for listeners korean is there any other piece of advice you'd like to share perhaps a last note of inspiration that you would like to end our conversation on today science is great but getting out in the world is also very important and integrate also your family and love one in your success story they are very important and so work is important for sure a very important for me but social aspect of my life and taking good care of myself is also very important I love it a perfect note to end on and if our listeners would like to learn more about you and more about the work that you're doing korean what is the best way for them to do that so they can actually go to my UCA webpage and my LinkedIn account where I often host some of my most recent research article and if they're interested in talking with me especially for this young woman in science this and your email will be happy to answer your question to mentor you if you need some mentorship always happy to actually support young scientists and young women in science from every place in the world and just reach out to me and I will be happy to help in the best way I can well much appreciated korean listeners definitely don't hesitate to reach out and get in touch and learn more about the amazing work that korean is doing in her lab and korean it's been such a pleasure to chat with you today thank you so much for your time thank you so very much for your time as well and up we can talk again soon oh absolutely I enjoyed our conversation and listeners always wonderful to have you here with us as well we'll see you next time on another episode of people behind the science