 Hi everyone and welcome to People Behind the Science. I'm Dr. Marie McNleely and I appreciate you joining me today for episode 793 with our guest Dr. Daway or David Hahn. If you like this episode listeners and you want to check out more stories from amazing people doing great science today, you can find more episodes of our show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or wherever else you like to listen. And today, David has some excellent stories to share about his life and his work. So get ready to meet another one of our fantastic people behind the science. Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNleely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to People Behind the Science. Today I am excited to be speaking with our guest Dr. Daway or David Hahn. So David, welcome to the show. How are you today? I'm great. How are you? I'm doing great and I appreciate you joining me for an interview today and to start off with, I'd like to give our listeners just a little bit of information about your background and let them know how you got to where you are today. So listeners, David is a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Biology at the University of Maryland College Park. He received his bachelor's degree in biology from China Agricultural University and his masters in biology from Truman State University. David recently completed his PhD in neuroscience at the University of Maryland College Park where he is now conducting postdoctoral research. And David, today we're excited to get to know you as a scientist, of course, but we also want to get to know you as a person. So can you tell us what do you like to do when you're not busy doing science? First and foremost, I really like the specific scientific question that I'm working on. And my hobbies are related to my research because I've always wanted to study snakes as a career. So for my hobby, I keep a couple of snakes in my home and I maintain their husbandry. I feed them, I care for them. And I also do a little bit of field curping, although I'm not very good at it. For those of you that's not familiar with it, field curping is just going out into the field and looking for snakes, or lizard amphibians, etc. etc. Very cool. So what kind of snakes do you keep? I keep a couple of Asian rat snakes species. I've kept them for a long time. That's wonderful. So what kinds of reptiles do you find when you're out in the wild looking in your area? I actually have a little backyard in my apartment. Under the wooden fence that's out in the backyard, you can find ring-next snakes and decays snakes, these are snakes that are kind of semi-falsorial and they eat earthworms. Those are really common. But if you go out into a park, you can probably see black rat snakes that's native to Maryland where I'm at. And then there's black racers, all kinds of stuff. If you know where to look. And I'm not very good at it, but I normally can't find stuff. That's awesome. I think getting outside is a nice break from the lab as well. And now you hinted that your hobbies are tied to your research. I'd love to talk about your research as well. So how do you describe what you do in science and some of these questions that you answer? Two people who are outside of your field are perhaps outside of science altogether. I study housemates here. That's just a bit and I think you kind of stand, right? Housemates here precisely because snakes don't have an external ear. So they don't detect down in the format that we're familiar with, in forms of airborne sounds. So they're very sensitive to low frequency vibrations. And my primary interest is how snakes can get access to those kinds of signals. But in brief, it's how snakes here. I think that communicates it nice and succinctly. I like it. So people are obviously familiar with the kinds of ears that humans have in terms of the external structures. And perhaps even the internal structures, what is it in snakes? What do they look like? Or how are they structured in snakes? Snakes don't have external ear opening. So they don't have the external ear that we have. And for us, our middle ears is the tempanic membrane or the ear drum that's connected to three middle ear obstacles. Then the middle ear obstacles are connected to the inner ear. For snakes, they don't have a tympanum. And they have one middle ear obstacle. And that middle ear obstacle is directly connected to the quadrice bone. That's a bone on their skull. And the other end of the middle ear obstacle is the inner ear. So it's basically the inner ear, the middle ear bone, and then another piece of bone on their skull. And that bone on their skull is also then connected to their lower jaw. So one way for vibrations to transmit to the snake's ear is through their lower jaw. Very cool. Well, as you probably guessed, David, I am fascinated by sensory neuroscience. I look forward to getting into some of the details of your work as we go through our conversation today. But I'd love to talk a little bit about motivation. I think you can tell that you are passionate about the work that you do. And I think it can be helpful to have little bits of motivation or inspiration to help you get through tough times in science. So David, do you have a quote or a saying or something that just really motivates you? I don't really have one. I guess I consider myself very fortunate to my whole science career to be able to do what I really love to do. People have asked me, why do I study snakes? And in the past, I've always struggled to give an answer to that. Now I can give you like a whole spiel about how they have these interesting sensory and motor adaptations, which is really similar lifestyle, and that harken back to their evolutionary history. But in reality, the answer to why I study snakes to quote my old advisor, Dr. Bruce Yang, is why not? So yes, I don't really have a motivational quote. I like doing what I do. I think it sounds like you are motivated in general by the work that you do your curiosity and answering these questions that you're really excited about. And I think that's something that can just help you power through these difficult days in science, just that underlying passion. Yeah, exactly. Well, you mentioned one of your previous mentors here, Dr. Yang. Let's talk about mentors next. So David, over the course of your career as a scientist, can you point to some of the people who might have served as your role models or mentors or people who you've just looked up to? I'm really fortunate to have had great advisors, even from my undergrad years. So I did my undergrad studies in China, I wrote cultural university in Beijing, where I did some research with a professor, Dr. Lee Trin Wong from the Chinese Academy of Science, who studies the field ecology of deer. But he also has like a herb interest when he goes out to the gobi desert of inner Mongolia. He finds all these lizards scurrying around in the desert. So he brought me in on a project to study some lizard ecophysiology. But now that I think back to it, I don't think everyone would treat an undergrad like this. But he treated me kind of like a deer, even though I had no research experience at all. And he let me come up with ideas. He let me write these little mini proposals about what to do when we get to the field. And he also taught me for people who've done field research, your plans don't always work. He taught me to come up with backup plans. And once I was in the field, he just put me in a hotel and came back to Beijing. So the field was in Mongolia. That's like a day's train ride. And I was in charge of the whole project while there, which was an amazing experience. Now that at a later stage in my career to think back upon that. And then for my master's degree, I was fortunate enough to work with Dr. Bruce Young at H.C. Field University. And he's just a great hurt nerd. He's a functional morphologist. But people have said there's no job that's called a herpitalgia. You have all these different names like anatomy, functional morphologist, ecologist, or in my case, I study neuroscience. But he's down. People who are fascinated with herbs, you can tell they're a herpnered. And Dr. Bruce Young is precisely a herpnered too. So we work together on different projects regarding the morphology and some of the EKGs in different snowy candidates or species. And he was also a great mentor. And now I did my PhD with Dr. Catherine Carr, who is a neuroscientist who asked the question and find organisms to answer those questions. But she is also first and foremost a biologist. She's fascinated with wild animals as well. So I came to the lab with all these questions related to how snakes here. And the lab has never worked on snake hearing before. But she's really open to me working on my own project and getting some progress. And whenever I needed help, she was always there to lend a hand. So every mentor in my career as a scientist, they were great advisors. And I consider myself very fortunate to have them. Well, it's wonderful to hear that at each step of this journey, you've had in science, you've had wonderful people to work with. And I think that's really cool that you had the opportunity to really shape a new research direction in the lab that you were in. And perhaps we can rewind back even further. You mentioned that your research excavates perhaps began as an undergraduate student. But let's take it back even farther. Do you remember, David, when you first started getting interested in science or biology or perhaps in snakes? I think it harkens back to when I was a kid. So digging through some of the old pictures that my family had of me. I think I was maybe just harvested maybe. And we were going to do and there was the photo of with large, Burmese Python. That's like 10, 12 feet long. And I had a picture of me holding on Python. I was pretty scared, I think. But I think the fascination sort of developed then. And as a kid, I also watched a lot of nature documentaries, fever, and all these guys. And there were great speakers. There were great presenters. They really presented how fascinating these animals could be. And I've been hooked ever since. And obviously, if you want to work with animals as a career, they're different paths. And each step along the way, I've always had great support from my family, which is also important for me to get here where I am today. Absolutely. And you hinted that there are different paths that you could have taken to pursue a career studying snakes or studying animals more generally. What made you think that science was the route that you wanted to go? So I like to work with animals. But then I realized that there's so much about these animals that we don't really know. And I kind of wanted to learn more about them. Right? There's obviously, if I want to work with them, I could become a zookeeper. But then I wouldn't get to do experiments. And as I mentioned before, during my undergrad studies, I wanted to study these animals, but there's different fields. And as an undergrad, I did a lot of field work. But then I realized I kind of like doing things in a lab because I enjoy air conditioning from time to time. So after I finished my undergrad, I decided to pursue questions that could be answered in a lab. I completely understand. I had that experience as well. I was like, field works great, but I like the comforts of the indoors. And I have utmost respect for the ecologists and all the field researchers out there because they're doing stuff that I don't think I can do. It is a very physical job, for sure. So let's talk about that transition. Then you sort of went into the scientific pathway as an undergraduate student started getting involved in undergraduate research. How did you decide to come to the United States to do your master's degree? So I guess there were more labs that worked on non-model organisms in the US. And I've read papers when I was undergrad and a lot of the people that wrote these papers are from the US. So I made the decision instead of pursuing a career in China. I would expand my horizons a little bit and see what's out there in the US. Very cool. And it sounds like you had a good experience working with your mentor for your master's degree and for your PhD as well. So can you talk about how you got that connection from your master's degree to then find that lab for your PhD? They're all kind of connected together. So I did like a summer intern in another lab in China in Chengdu. I think the Chinese Academy of Science, Chengdu Institute of Biology or something. And the lab that I worked in there, the PI, he was actually a postdoc of Dr. Catherine Park. His name is Dr. Tang Yijong. And my master's advisor, Dr. Bruce Yang, is also interested in questions related to hearing in reptiles. So just to be of them, they all know each other. So that's how the dots connected. Yeah, I think that really highlights just the importance of networking and science. I think we don't necessarily think about that as we're going through these different stages of our careers, but that network can provide a lot of opportunities further down the line. Exactly. Yes. Well, it's wonderful to hear about your journey. And I'd love to hear a little bit more about your research. Can you tell us more about one of these projects that you're working on that you are just really excited about at the moment? I've mentioned before, I'm generally interested in figuring out how things can spread. It's a project that I set out to do during my PhD. And at that time, I didn't realize how huge of a project that would be. And when I finished my PhD, I realized I've only just scratched the surface. So in a series of papers in the 1970s, Peter Hartline actually looked at this precise question and he found that two pathways, the somatosensory pathway and the auditory pathway, both pathways could pick up vibration. Somatosensory pathways are related to the sense of touch. But then to answer the question like how snakes use these pathways and how these signals traveling up these two pathways interact in the brain, you have to first understand each pathway itself. And it turns out the auditory pathway snakes hasn't exactly been figured out yet. I've mentioned before that there's this understanding that makes pickup vibrational signals through their lower jaw and that signal goes to their inner ear. But the neural pathway, the central pathways in the brain, the neural circuitry, it's still not that really well understood. So that's what I've been working out through my PhD. And the recent paper that's published in current biology kind of answers one of the existing questions in that aspect. Of course, I used the Tokage Echo in the current biology paper because the auditory pathway is more well understood. But the same principles apply to the snake. The same pathway could be found on the snake. And what I found was that these animals snakes and lizards, they can detect vibrational stimuli not only with their auditory end organ, they can also detect it with the vestibular end organ in their ear, namely the sacchial. Your vestibular pathways are related to the sense of balance. So what you have here is with previous data from previous researchers is that snakes just the year alone, it has at least two pathways. One is with the conventional auditory pathway in the cochlea, that could detect the vibration. The other is the vestibular end organ or the odorific end organ, that is the sacchial. So there's some other distant pieces I'm trying to clean up there during my time working as a postdoc in Dr. Kars Lab for the remainder of the year. But then you have another aspect which is the medicinesary pathway. So the auditory pathways and the somatic sensory pathways all kind of end up in the same brain region, that is the torus from a circularist or the inferior coliculus or the auditory mid-brain, right? And that's how both pathways contribute to vibration detection. And in 2025, I will be working at the Harvard Medical School for Dr. Guinty, whose lab uses mouth models to study how the inferior coliculus could mediate vibration detection via somatic sensory pathways. Very interesting. Well, we appreciate you giving us a high-level description of one of these projects that you're working on. And actually, maybe we'll go in some more detail on this project because I think this was a really exciting finding that you had there. Looking at these geckos, which I think are cool organisms already, when understanding how they perceive sound. And this was I think the first instance of finding this alternative way of sensing sound. Is that correct? Well, it's correct in the sense that it's the first instance in MNEO. It's the first instance in reptiles, birds, and mammals, but for fish and frogs, the sacriote has always had an auditory function. So my research kind of shows that this particular pathway, the sacriote auditory pathway, is preserved in the lineage of MNEO. That is, take the lizards. Well, we appreciate you sharing this exciting project with us. And I know this was a recent publication. So definitely an exciting time to have this paper now out. But I imagine there were some challenges leading up to it. And I think in science, failure is common. Challenges are common. And we'd really like to talk about these because I think oftentimes those stories don't see the light of day. So can you share with me and our listeners a time where you really struggled with something, David, or perhaps you had a major failure? And if so, could you walk us through how you got through that tough time? Of course. So the objective of my PhD project is to find out how snakes detect vibration. And to do that, I first went out to describe the auditory pathway of snakes, the central auditory pathway. However, this turned out to be not as easy as I thought, because a lot of the neural structures in the brain doesn't seem to be where I expected them to be. Like they're not comparable in terms of size or location when you're comparing the snake brain to the brain of lizards or the brain of birds. I mean, at the end, I found out they were kind of similar, but the sizes were just tiny. But when I'm kind of investigating this project, I had no idea about that. So this is kind of understandable because snakes don't have veered drums that hear airborne sounds like the other reptiles. There's got to be something weird that's going on centrally in the brain. But I wasn't expecting it to be this weird. So to make sure like which neural structure or which nuclei is which in the brain, we decided to use tract tracing to map every projection from the inner ear. Mind you, this includes the organ for hearing, that is the cochlea, and also ticks organs for balance. So it was also very difficult since the snake inner ear was already small to begin with. So the structures where we're trying to get the die or the tracer into is very tiny. And what we thought would be simple, like a small project turned out into this whole big thing. But in the end, precisely because we did this, we traced where every organ went to in the brain, precisely because we did this, we discovered that snakes and lizards used one of the organs for balance, the sactual to hear vibration, which led to the publication in currombology. And during this trial and error and taking on the whole lot more work than I expected, I was able to work through that period of time with of course a lot of encouragement and I was troubleshooting together with my PhD advisor, Catherine Carr, and also I got a lot of help from colleagues in the community. So a lot of people in the field of comparative new anatomy were extremely generous with their help. There isn't a lot of competition for space per se when working with weird animals. Everyone does their own thing with their own species of preference with their own species that they're passionate about. They also really appreciate the work that other people do in other cool animals and they try to help as much as possible. So it's really a great community. In the end, it kind of boils down to perseverance. I told myself is someone else has done it before in other species, then I can probably do it too. If I just refine my technique, you can try over and over again. And in the end, that's how it all worked out. I think that's amazing. Was there ever a point where you were on the verge of giving up, David? I would say there were impulses to give up like at one particular night where you spend the whole day trying to do this and it didn't work. But that was the temporary thing. Like when you count down when you like drive home from work and after spending some time with yourself, this is the stuff that I want to do and I'm not going to give up just because it didn't work for one day or one month. I love that. I think taking the time to clear your head is valuable in science. Exactly. That's great. And I think these challenges are often many on the way to a success in science. But we love celebrating these successes, whether they're just the small laboratory victories that may happen on any given day or these big wins like getting a paper out. So do you have a favorite success story, David, from your life or science that you'd like to share with us today? Yeah. So the favorite success I have was coming out of all these dying injections I was talking about because the snake auditory pathway isn't exactly mapped. So I had to inject die into all of its inner-year end organ, the vestibular end organ, the auditory end organ to see where they go. And the biggest win or one of the big ones that came out of this was the discovery of the involvement of the sacchial end organ for balance in the process of hearing for snake illnesses. And recently I've been playing with double fluorescent labeling trying to combine immunofiscus chemistry and track tracing to figure out if there are other parts of the auditory pathway that I might be missing. And I've had some success, but I'm still fine to meet the technique. Very cool. And I think some of these successes, it's a long time coming. There are a lot of steps in the process. So let's talk about this discovery in the geckos that you mentioned of the sort of the importance of the sacchial here. How did you celebrate that particular success? I mean, what was the moment where you realized that there was a success even? We approached this study from two aspects. One is to map out the circuitry from the sacchial to the auditory midbrain. The second is physiology. But the neuroanatomocaeaivitis came first. And the instance that I realized that, oh, this is something new, was the anatomococotracing connected the auditory midbrain to the sacchial. So we did some retrograde labeling by injecting tracer into the auditory midbrain, which labeled a structure in the brainstem. And then we injected dye into the sacchial. And the sacchial projected to this very same brainstem structure. So that was when we realized the sacchial might be involved in hearing in these animals. So how did you celebrate this big win when it's sort of dawned on you that you've made a discovery? It's more of a relief. Things started working and we found something new. But I think when the paper was published, me and my wife went to the next restaurant. Perfect. You have to celebrate in some way. I feel like in science, take a moment to appreciate. Yeah. Well, I think these scientific successes can be really motivating as well. They can make you want to just get back in the lab and answer the next questions on the list. But we also encourage our listeners to take a break to give their minds a break and to read broadly. So David, when you look on your bookshelf, do you have a favorite book that you can recommend for all of us, whether it's related to science or not? One of the first scientific literature that really pulled me in to try to understand the sensory biology of snakes is a book by Harvey Lillewites that's called How Snakes Work. Some of who writes this book is obviously a herpner too. And I think he studies mainly eco-physiology. But in this book, he summarizes how snakes function, the bowel mechanics, the neuro pathways and snakes in a very easy to access manner. So it's a great book. I strongly recommended. And more recently, because I'm interested in these questions about evolution and how these pathways come about, I've been trying to pick up a bit of paleontology. And on my way to work, I'm listening to an audiobook that's called Your Inner Fish, which is great. It's really accessible and gives you like a basic of some of the paleontological findings that tie fish all the way to land vertebrates. I haven't finished it, but so far, I really like the book. Well, we will add these books to our list on our website, How Snakes Work and Your Inner Fish. Listeners definitely check them out. And I think another thing in science that we haven't really touched on in detail yet are some of the opportunities that you get to travel. We of course talked about your fieldwork experiences early. And I think those are a completely different travel experience. But do you have a favorite place, David, that your science has taken you that you could tell us about? So before starting my PhD in Catherine's lab, when I completed my master's degree with Dr. Bruce Young, we published a paper about functional morphology of snakeskin. And we found one species of snake that had super thick and super tough skin. We called it the rhinoceros among certain. After that, that was fortunately before COVID. We set out to Gautenburg, Sweden to present our research at the Society for Experimental Biology. That was my first time traveling to Europe. And I had a great time. My wife came along too. So we not only stopped at the conference, we also met up with a couple of future collaborators that ended up talking to a lot from the down the line. And in general, this year, a lot has never been there before. And it was a lot of fun. That sounds awesome. So were there particular things that you did or saw while you were there that you enjoyed? Yeah. So we stayed in a boat house because we were like poor grass units. We went on Airbnb and found this little boat that had a van and all the facilities at a great price. So we stayed in a boat house from the duration of the conference. It was an experience. If you've never done it, I suggest to try it. Awesome. And how was the conference there? A lot of fun. That was a while ago before my PhD. So that was like seven, eight years ago. But it was my first time not giving a poster, but giving a oral presentation. It was great. Oh, it sounds like an amazing experience. And I think these travel opportunities are something that people don't necessarily realize goes along with a career in science. But they are just wonderful opportunities. Like you said, to connect with collaborators to meet scientists from all over the world. I completely agree. Well, let's talk about scientists that you've met and worked with over the years. I think oftentimes in science, people have a bad reputation right. There's this idea in the media of scientists being these folks that are in their pristine white lab coats being very serious all the time and doing nothing but work. And I think that goes against a lot of the people that I've met in science who are these funny, amazing creative people. So do you have a story or an example, David, of maybe a quirky tradition or just a funny moment that you shared with colleagues that goes against some of these stereotypes and really showcases this human side of science. So in count of the lab, I'm her last grad student. And when I was here, there were three grad students and one postdocs, but they all kind of finished before me. And at the end, it was just me working in the lab. And I'm not complaining. I really liked it. I had the whole lab to myself. Oh, that's amazing. So how about previous labs that you worked in? Were there any traditions or things that the group got together to do? So with Bruce, he's also really cool. He has a sign on his lab, like a cartoon. That's it. I do my own experiment. I like it. So he does his own experiment. And Catherine, believe me, will not also does her own experiment. And these were all small labs for the most of like three years, the last three years in Catherine's lab. I was only student. At Bruce's lab, I was the only student. We worked with each other or we worked our own experiment. But to answer your own question, not really. No, no one any get together because there weren't a lot of people. Two can be a party if you make it. I think that's awesome. And I think being able to work side by side with a principal investigator in a laboratory is even sometimes a unique experience in science, where a lot of people are used to kind of working in these bigger labs where you might see your PI once or twice a week or something like that. So can you talk about what that was like sort of being shoulder to shoulder with these pretty distinguished scientists relatively early in your career? Like I said, I'm just really fortunate to have some as advisors. So both of them had, I guess, a mentoring philosophy of being there when you needed help. And when you propose a project, obviously, there would be a lot of discussions, but carrying out the project with Bruce, it was more hands-on. But with Catherine, it was more hands-off. But she was always here when I needed, for example, showing me how to do electro-finality. One can't just pick it out on your own, I think. But she hasn't done physiology in snakes before. But she helped me test equipment. She helped me fix noise. It sounds like you were almost learning together as you went through these uncharted territory for the laboratory, which I think is really cool. Well, David, it's been wonderful to hear more about some of these experiences that you've had in the lab over the years. And I think in science, you're able to answer some really cool questions. But oftentimes you're limited, unfortunately, by things like funding, staff, time, technology, or just the feasibility of the projects that you'd like to do. So if we took away the barriers that normally hold you back, what would you want to answer? What would you want to do? The burning question I still have now is what sensory pathways underlie vibration sensing in reptile. And for snakes, especially, I think there was a recent science paper that came out that snakes underwent some kind of evolutionary singularity, meaning that there was like a huge expansion of morphological diversity between snakes. So in a gist, the model snake species that I'm using might not represent every snake. So if I had unlimited resources, and I can confirm this observation, because I went to the Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology, which had all these boxes of slides of different reptiles from the collection of Glenn Northcut, who is a renowned comparative neurologist. And he had a bunch of snakes that I didn't have access in the lab. And I was looking at these snake sections and their brain structures. I don't know about the other parts of the brain, but the brain structures related to hearing or vibration sensing in these animals, they vary a ton, which confirms the finding that snakes might have gone through evolutionary singularity. So if I had unlimited resources, I would try to see how much variation there is and what the variation associated with. And could that variation give me insights into how snakes evolved? Because the very question of how snakes evolved, how snakes became snakes from their lizard relatives is also a question that's been debated and up in the air. And maybe by serving in this, I could have my perspective on it. Well, David, I think this is fascinating. Thank you for giving me and our listeners something to ponder this afternoon. And we appreciate you joining us. And I'd love to end with some advice for our listeners out there who might be on their own scientific journey. So when you look back at your life and career so far, David, what is the best piece of advice that somebody gave you that you can pass on to our listeners? So first of all, most I'm still quite junior. I don't know if I'm a stage where I can give out advice. But one thing that's really resonated with me is that during presentation, if I don't know something, I should make evidence-based speculations, of course. But if you really don't know anything, just say you don't know. Instead of trying to come up with something that makes you a cultural on stage, that's one of the advices, a couple of advisors that's given me. And also perseverance through tough research questions is pretty important. And oftentimes, there's light at the end of the tunnel. Oftentimes, I like the qualifier. Often times. Well, David, thank you so much for sharing this advice with all of us. Is there anything else you'd like to share? Do you have a last note of inspiration that you'd like to leave our listeners with at the end of our conversation? I hope that after listening to me gushing about snakes on this list, the listeners could gain a bit more appreciation for these animals. For example, snakes, to me, they're really cool. They somehow manage to survive for millions of years without legs. But they can make do by having flexible jaws so they don't need to care into their prey. And they also have evolved to use their ribs to walk. And as I said earlier, they also don't have ear drums to hear sound, but they have acute senses for smell. And as I've demonstrated, vibration sensing. And some even have infrared vision, which is pretty unique among animals. All of these adaptations, I think speaks volumes about their evolution. I find them extremely fascinating. And I hope after today listening to this podcast, the audience does too. Wonderful. Well, I think we've definitely come to appreciate some of the unique qualities of snakes through the information you shared today. Well, listeners definitely take some time to learn a little bit more about snakes and learn a little bit more about the research that David does. And if they'd like to do so, David, what is the best way for them to do so? If you're interested in my work or just really interested in talking about snakes, I'm always up to talk about snakes and lizards. You can reach me at dhahn phan1236 at qmd.edu. Perfect. Well, listeners definitely get in touch if you have any questions. And David, it's been a pleasure chatting with you today. We truly appreciate you joining us on the show. And thank you. Thank you very much for having me. It's such an honor. Well, it's been great to chat with you and listeners. It's been wonderful to have you here with us as well. We hope you join us again next time for another episode of People Behind the Science.