 Hey listeners, it's great to have you here today for episode 784 of People Behind the Science. This week we are re-broadcasting our interview with our guest, Dr. Susan Wessler. listeners, Susan studies genes and the genome, focusing on transposable elements, which are pieces of DNA that move from one site to another. In the process of moving these transposable elements often make more copies. All organisms have these pieces of mobile DNA and they make up a large portion of our genome. Susan wants to know how organisms survive and thrive with all of this extra DNA, as well as why it exists and whether it provides any benefits. In our interview she discussed some of her exciting research, her career, and her life outside the lab. So I hope you enjoy this episode of People Behind the Science. Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNeely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to another episode of People Behind the Science. Today I am excited to introduce you all to Dr. Susan Wessler. So Sue, thank you so much for joining us today. How are you? I'm fine. Wonderful. Well we are excited to chat with you about your experience and your research today. For listeners just to give you a little introduction here, Susan is a distinguished professor of genetics at the University of California Riverside. She is also a Howard Hughes Medical Institute professor and the home secretary of the National Academy of Sciences. Sue received her PhD in biochemistry from Cornell University and then spent time as a postdoctoral fellow at the Carnegie Institute of Washington. She also served on the faculty at the University of Georgia for over 25 years before moving to UC Riverside where she is today. Susan has received many awards and honors over the course of her career. She is a member of the National Academy of Sciences, a member of the American Philosophical Society, a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Susan is also the recipient of the Stephen Hales Prize from the American Society of Plant Biologists, the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology Excellence in Science Award, and very recently the McClendon Award from the Maze Genetics. Susan is with us today to tell us about her journey through life and science. So Susan, today we want to get to know you, both as a scientist and also as a person. So can you start off by telling us what you like to do with your time when you're not doing science? All right. I like to read. I love to read. I like to exercise and I usually read when I exercise. Recently I've been getting to know my new home in Southern California, so I've been here for five years, and there's a lot to do in Southern California and a lot of places to visit. So I've been visiting the mountains, visiting the beach. I love it here. It's a wonderful place to live. And I like to hang out with my husband and visit my daughters whenever I can. They're older, so it's more a treat to see them than something I do every day. Certainly. You get a little treat to travel and go on vacation to visit them, right? Exactly. Exactly. Well, Sue, it's wonderful to hear about some of your hobbies, how you spend your time when you're not at work. And I'm very impressed to hear that you can read while exercising. I have tried it many a time on the treadmill. It never goes well. So do you have a secret? Well, I don't run. I walk. I walk fast, then. Yeah, I know other people tell me they have a hard time doing that, but fortunately I don't, because I look forward to that every morning. Gotcha. Well, we always like to get book recommendations. So can you tell us about a book that you've read and really enjoyed that you think myself and our listeners should check out? Well, I like to read history. I think I would have been a historian if I didn't become a scientist. And I guess I'm lucky because I probably wouldn't have been as gainfully employed as a historian. I enjoy reading biographies. My favorite, I think, has been Robert Carrows' biography for parts so far of Lyndon Johnson. I'm currently reading biography of Einstein. I'm reading a book about Kim Philbius, fine, the family, Doris Kern's good one. That's usually what I like to read. And occasionally I'll pick up fiction and read that when I need my mind to relax. So you mentioned you would have been a historian perhaps in another life, is there a particular area of history that you're interested in a particular period? I like American history. Okay. I also like the history of science, sort of the history of science in the 20th century. So I think one of my favorite books, which I didn't mention, was the Emperor of All Malathe's about, I think it's called a biography of cancer or a history of cancer. It's a fairly recent book and I've led discussion groups with students. It's a wonderful history about cancer therapies. It's a really good introduction if people don't understand, you know, just about leukemia and just the history of cancer over the century, which has been fascinating. Certainly, well, Sue, great book recommendations for our listeners. We'll put them out on our website for all of them to find. And I think it's really interesting, this picture that you're drawing of being interested in science and history. And I think a lot of times knowing the history almost makes you appreciate the scientific advancements of a time more. So very, very cool. Yeah, absolutely. It also provides a story. I know when I used to teach introductory biology, I used to sort of present it in a historical context. Although I think students now don't think the same way about history. I think there's so much going on now in the current that history, for a lot of students, they find very boring. Which is really a shame, I think. Well, I think it's tough to with the curriculum for a lot of scientists now. You're sort of forced to choose between taking a lot of these history or archer, those kinds of classes. And all of the science classes you have to take. It's a challenge. But, Sue, great to hear about some of your own interests. And now we're going to dive into your scientific interests. Can you tell us all how you describe your work? Does someone who might not be as familiar with science? I know, that's always tough, especially because what I do is really basic research. And I think it's sort of much easier to describe things that people can understand, like maybe looking for a cure for cancer or something like that. But when I talk with people, what I mention is, have them think about genes. Have them think about that genes encode things that ultimately form their body and the bodies of all living things. Then I mention that all of the information necessary to encode the information for our entire body can fit into about 2% of our genome. So what I say is that if, and I describe as best I can, you know, what a genome is, that it's all of our genetic information. It's what makes up our chromosomes. And if all of that information, all of those letters, A, G, C, and T, were assembled into textbooks, they would fill, you know, with normal size fonts or whatever. They would fill about 1,000 textbooks, textbooks like introductory biology textbooks. Yeah, and if the information that comprises the genes that provide the information necessary to build us or to build an enhanced, that would take up maybe 20 textbooks. So the question is what are the other 980 and approximately 500 textbooks worth of information derived from what I work on. So the question is, I have been pursuing for the last, since 1980, 35 years. It makes me feel so old. So the question is, first of all, what is this stuff? And I think we pretty much know very well what the stuff is, us and many other labs and the world working on it. But then how do living organisms and all living organisms have transposable elements, have mobile DNA. So it's mobile DNA. It's called junk DNA. It's called transposable elements. There are a lot of names for it. The question is, how do organisms survive and thrive when they have this huge amount of genetic information that they carry around a copy that seemingly doesn't make any contribution to who they are. And I think that's part of the question is that we ask, why is this stuff there here or whatever? How can organisms thrive despite it? And does it benefit organisms? And I think that us and many other labs around the world are slowly answering these questions. And it's just very exciting because I think for the last 20 years or 30 years we've been able to sequence DNA. And I think one of the big surprises, one of the big shocks is that the vast majority of what we're sequencing is transposable elements. We knew that they existed. We've known for about 50 or 60 or 70 years. But we never knew that they were the most abundant component of the genomes of all higher organisms. It's really, really cool. Well, I am intrigued to see that was a fantastic description, really making it relatable. And we're going to talk more about your research as we go through the interview. But I always like to start with a little bit of motivation to get us interested to get us moving, get our brains working. So can you share with us today Susan, your favorite motivational quote or saying that you just really like to keep in your mind as you're going through your day. Well, there's two of them and I don't know if they're motivational, but one of them is there is no right answer. And as a scientist, you know, we think of right answers. But when you're actually pursuing a problem, there is no right answer. And so what that means to me is that you should be imaginative. You should be free to, you know, pose questions and attempt to answer them with no preconceived notions. That's one. And the other quote I have, which really relates more to what I do in my life. And as a scientist, you know, a professor, you know, whatever, you can do lots of things. And the question is, what do you choose to do? And my husband's favorite saying really is only do what only you can do. So there are things that you can delegate to other people. And there are things that only you can do. And what I look forward to do on a daily basis is those things that only I can do. All those are to fantastic quotes and really great advice for young and aspiring scientists. Only that thought that there is no right answer. Now this was one of the hardest things for me to accept in graduate school because you're so used to, you know, taking exams, things like that where there is a right answer. And there was one right answer. And if you don't get it, you don't get it. In fact, there's a really good book about that. I think it's called ignorance. And it's written by a professor at Columbia University. And it's that one of the major misconceptions that we kind of feed undergraduates, we meeting, you know, professors of science universities is just that that, you know, science is a bunch of facts. And it's just the opposite. Science is about the unknown. It's a bunch of questions, right? Yeah, when we talk later, I'll talk a little bit about that's one of my great interest now. And that is trying to fix the way we teach science at the undergraduate level. Absolutely. Well, fantastic quotes and little ideas to keep in your mind as you're going through a day. And I'm curious, Susan, to hear a little bit more, not only about what motivates you, but about who motivates you. Can you tell us about your role models? I have two types of role models. I mean, I have some very close female friends. I have two very, very close friends. And they're both scientists, they're both biologists, both plant biologists. And we have been friends for 35 or 40 years. We have been friends for all that time. And I think we serve as each other's role models at different times in our life. We're up and down. And we look to each other, you know, because there aren't many successful women in science. And so I think these two friends of mine have been really invaluable in sort of setting the bar for me if I'm down and giving me perspective. So I think on a daily basis, you know, that's sort of one type of role model. The other type is sort of the person that you, I guess idolize would be the wrong word, but sort of your hero, your hero. And for me, that's Barbara McClendon, who discovered transposable elements back in the 1940s, who want to know about prize in 1983 for that discovery 40 years after her discovery of transposable elements. And who I had the incredible good fortune to know for the last 10 years of her life. So she died in 1991 and she was 90 years old. So she discovered transposable elements at the genetic level using corn, maize, studying mutations and maize and showing that these mutations were caused by this new genetic entity, which she described as transposable elements. So she truly discovered what has turned into her, as I said before, the most abundant component of all of our genomes. And she won the Nobel Prize in 1983 by herself. And as I said, as a post doctor, a fellow with the Cornie institution, my project was to try to isolate her elements at the molecular level. She had strains of corn and she described the behavior of transposable elements in those strains. They caused mutations, which meant that we knew exactly where these transposable elements were located and exactly what gene they were located because of her genetic analysis. And my job and the person I worked with on this project, our job was to actually isolate the DNA of this gene containing this transposable element and then characterize it. So for the transposable elements had been isolated before in bacteria and they had been isolated shortly before we isolated our element in Drosophila, model organisms and in yeast. But they hadn't been isolated in the organism where they were discovered in corn. So that's what we did. But she was just a remarkable person. Well, that is wonderful. What was it like to meet her for the first time? It was intimidating. So she worked in a small lab at Coltspring Harbor in Lone Island. And so she visited actually the lab where I was a post doctor. And then I went and visited her and I actually spent a whole week with her looking at her strains and kernels and all that. And quite honestly, at the end of the week, when we spent all week, we'd walk around Coltspring Harbor. I mean, I just felt like, you know, like a moron. I mean, this was somebody who just broke in. I mean, after a brilliant woman, and I just felt like she spent a whole week with me and I didn't really feel like I contributed anything at the end of the week. She just said to me, this has been so wonderful. She said, I've had such a wonderful time with you. Please, you know, I can't wait to you come back. And I was just blown away. It was, you know, such an honor. And, you know, I would sort of sit there next to her. And I'm sure I'm five, two and a half. And she's probably five foot. So, you know, I had some sort of look down at her, but she's a very distinctive appearance, you know, extremely wrinkled face, short black hair. This picture is of her probably on your website. You could put pictures. But her eyes would just, you know, there was somebody home there. And she was just extremely perceptive and also very funny. I think you had to know her well to know she was funny. Otherwise, she could be really intimidating. It was wonderful. It's one of those things where I sat there next to her. And this is before I had any children. I just said, you know, remember this because this is something you can't want to tell your children and your grandchildren about. Well, Sue, I'm so glad you shared this little story with us today. I mean, I think a lot of people can relate to being in the presence of someone that they really look up to and just feeling horribly intimidated and underqualified to be talking to them. You know, this sort of imposter syndrome is something that everyone experiences. And it's wonderful to hear it. But she was such a great person. And you were able to get to talk to her and gain some of her experiences and knowledge. So wonderful, wonderful opportunity. So can you take us back to the beginning? Sue, we've talked about some of your experiences over the course of your career. But can you tell us how it all began? What guy you interested in science in the first place? Well, it's not like my parents were professors and I had a chemistry set or anything like that. It was pretty much the opposite. I was born in the Bronx. You know, we lived in this tiny little apartment. Neither one of my parents went to college. My mother was a whole make and my father's electrical contractor. But I really liked science. And what they pushed me towards was, you know, what many parents who didn't go to college pushed their kids. So to be a doctor, to be a medical doctor. And so that got me at least taking science courses. What really changed me in terms of sciences growing up in New York City. I had the incredible privilege to go to the Bronx high school of science. And so this is, I don't know if you'll listen as no, but essentially in New York City to this day, there are, you know, I guess they're magnet schools now, but they're specialized high schools where there's Bronx high school of science, there's stiferson, there's performing arts and there's music and art. So there's high schools that specialize in art, high schools that specialize in science. And anybody in the city can take the test, the entrance exam. And if you take the exam and you make the cut off, and that's it. So I had the great fortune of going to Bronx high school of science. And so from the time I started in high school, and this was back in the late 60s. And the schools in New York City were not very good back then. And so I was really fortunate to be introduced to science in this way. And that really got me much more interested in science rather than, you know, being a doctor. I was pre-med my entire time in college, but at the very last minute and there's a long story that I'm not going to go into. It's about a boyfriend, and it's been all this stuff. So I wasn't sure what I wanted to do when I graduated from Stony Brook. I took a year off and I went to Europe. I worked as a secretary, then I went to Europe, traveled around. And actually, you know, before I went to Europe, I had decided that I wanted to go to graduate school. And so I ended up going to Cornell. It was a wonderful, wonderful, nurturing experience. I'd loved graduate school there. And then, you know, I ended up working on plants. This is another thing I think that I see so many students. I talked to a lot of students and they're so earnest about they think so hard about what they're going to do with their careers. You know, they research all this and that and, you know, and they sort of leave nothing to chance. And I think most of us, most of life isn't that way. So for me, the way I started working on transposable elements was just totally by accident. Well, first of all, I was married at the time when I finished graduate school and I had decided, and my ex-husband, now my ex-husband, too much information here, but he had to work in the Maryland Baltimore area. So he had gotten a post-op there. And so there was somebody, her name was Nina Fedorov, and I wanted to work in her lab and she had been working on frogs on gene expression in an organism called Xanapis. And I figured, okay, you know, I do this. And so I called her up. And she said, well, you know, I'm not working on frogs anymore. I'm working on maves, on colon, on transposable elements. And honestly, and this is completely true. I didn't want to sound like an idiot to her. And so I said, oh, of course, I know that. So I ended up going to her lab and working on the project I just told you about isolating my clintox transposable elements in her lab. So I had no intention of working on plants, totally fortuitous. And then after that, same thing, I didn't know where I wanted to go. So again, being a female, I wanted to have children, I wanted to have a lab, I wanted to have it all. But I realized that if I lived in a place like Boston or Chicago or whatever, it would be difficult. You know, I couldn't afford to live in a really nice place. So I'd have to commute. Child care was really expensive. So that's one of the things that attracted me to Georgia, to Athens, Georgia. And I think a lot of women, when I go talk to women's groups, women's science groups, what I often say to them is that you control a lot of your life. And in this case, I knew I wanted to have children. So I basically found the place where that could happen and where they also had an outstanding plant group. And that was at the University of Georgia in Athens. And it really played out exactly as I planned in a sense. You know, I had my first child when I was 31. I was able to hire somebody to come to my house every single day. And I was able to afford this. So I had terrific child care. The person stayed with us for three years, didn't live in the house, but stayed with us. And, you know, quite honestly, I mean, my life was never easier than when this person was in my house, taking care of my child. So what is often a really difficult thing for women, I think that in some cases, you can make your life easier. I don't know. I mean, I wouldn't speak for other people, but in my case, it worked out wonderfully. And when I had my second child, I think I was 39. Same thing, we hired somebody. She came to the house. And she spent three years with us. And again, it was relatively easy. I lived three miles from the lab. If my child got sick, I was able to come home. If you have to commute an hour each way, that's two hours. Right. That is not feasible. Yeah. Exactly. There are things that make it very hard to be an assistant professor. And there are many more things now. You know, those are things like affordability, the price of child care, the security of who is your child with. And I think sometimes you just, you know, in my case, at least I don't want to, like I said, talk for a lot of people. You compromise. And often those compromises are what are responsible for you being successful. So it's a compromise. But in the end, it turns out to be very important thing for your success. Certainly. Well, I know I speak for myself. And perhaps for a lot of our listeners out there, when I'm saying that it is so reassuring to hear you say that you can have it all. And you don't have to have everything figured out up front. I mean, I think a lot of people do get stuck in this mindset that you have to have the grand plan up front in order for it to play out well. But so much of the plan or the opportunities that you're presented with. And you can't possibly predict those. And so I think that people should at least be open to things that they're not expecting and take some risks. Take a lot of risks. But you know, on the other hand, it is much probably shouldn't say this, but unless you're really, really committed to being an academia, it is not the same world as it was when I started. It is much more difficult now. It's much more difficult to get grand funding. It's just difficult in so many ways. You know, as someone with some influence now, myself and many other people are trying to change that. But it's not the wonderful profession it used to be. It's much more difficult to be successful. Certainly. And I think this really ties in nicely to one of the questions that I love to ask our guests is to talk about some of the challenges that you've faced in your career, even some of the failures that you've had to kind of show that the journey can be bumpy at times, but it's still a fantastic career. I was trying to think about that. You know, the failures don't have to do with scientific failures because sort of by definition, you know, science is about failure. Right. I mean, there are only failures if you have expectations that this is the way it's going to work. And then it doesn't work that way. And I think the thing about doing science is you have to be open to possibilities and you have to let your experiments talk to you. So I've had no failures that have to do with, you know, actually not getting the experimental results. I wanted or anything like that or putting all my eggs in one basket and finding out that, well, you know, it just doesn't work that way. You know, one of the things is I had somebody in my lab who was manipulating the data. So fraud is something that some people have to deal with. And it probably is the most frightening thing to deal with is if, you know, someone is manipulating the data and then publishing something that is not true. And this happens in a lot of labs because if you run a lab, you're often not working at the bench. And so you're not watching people. And so fortunately, in my case, the fraudulent work never got published. But if you ask most scientists, you know, if they're afraid of this, you could be successful for 20 years. But if there's a paper or two or three where, you know, it has to be retracted because of fraud, that can ruin your career. So, you know, it is very, very scary. And it happens. It happens quite a bit. Certainly. So how do you deal with one of these situations? Like if you, for example, in this case, found out there was fraud going on in your lab, you know, what's your initial response? And how do you take action? You go right to the administration. You go right to the, in this case, the vice president for research. Gotcha. And they do it. You don't do the investigating. You bring in people who are trained to do that. Gotcha. I was going to say it must be difficult with people in your own lab, you know, to start that confrontation. So it's good to hear that they have systems in place to take care of it. Well, every university has systems in place, not that they're great systems. Right. But it's something that you can't do on your own. You have to leave it to other people to do. So that's one thing. I think the usual having grant proposals rejected or papers rejected or something like that. You know, those are the failures that I think many of us deal with. And sometimes you learn from it. Sometimes it's not fair. I think a lot of times I try to tell students undergraduates, you graduate students about, you know, what it's like being involved in research and, you know, writing the grants, writing the papers. And you know, it's not a perfect system. So a lot of times the people who review your manuscripts do a lousy job. And that sucks. And you know, there's very little you can do about it. I mean, you can appeal and say, oh, but many cases, they reject so many papers that they're not going to reconsider. All scientists deal with that kind of failure or disappointment or whatever of rejection. Yeah. I think I've had a fairly straight shot. There haven't been many setbacks besides, you know, personal kind of stuff of divorce and a sick child and stuff like that. I mean, those are the things that are really important. Certainly. Well, I think you brought up some really great examples of problems that scientists face, not only scientifically, but personally and all these things sort of come together when you're trying to get your career up and moving and keep things going. So glad to hear about these examples that you mentioned, but we don't just want to talk about the difficult times, the challenges, the problems. So can you tell us next to about a success story, one of these things that really meant a lot to you and it can be a big success or even a small victory. Well, I'm in the last, I'd say, seven or eight years, maybe 10 years, sort of we focused a lot of my energy on science education. And again, sort of bringing innovation to the classroom. So the problem, and I think it's being realized nationwide and has many years is that we really do a lousy job teaching undergraduates, introducing undergraduates to science. So what's happened now is, you know, introductory classes, whether it be biology, chemistry, have hundreds of people sitting in these seats and a professor up front showing a PowerPoint or whatever. And the problem is that we're turning off a lot of undergraduates to science. So the number of students who come into a university who want to be a science manager and then decide not to because they've been turned off to it is like 60 or 70%. Oh my gosh, I didn't realize it was so high. It's huge. And it's even worse for minority students. And these are exactly the students that we need in our, not just our research labs, because I said before I wouldn't really recommend to a lot of people to do what I'm doing because it's not the way it used to be. But we need science makers in our society for all sorts of jobs, I mean, besides doctor, besides pharmacy, regulatory affairs, science industry is growing and growing biotechnology. So, you know, we really need to fix the situation. And HHMI, how would use medical institute? They've recognized this many, many years ago that we are doing a very bad job of essentially bringing the excitement of research to the classroom. And they started a program. So I'm now an HHMI professor. I was an HHMI professor starting in 2006. They had a grant competition. They do this every four years. The award is a million dollars. And what you have to do is essentially tell them how you will bring the excitement of research to be on the graduate classroom. And things that are being done by the National Science Foundation, by, you know, the federal government is starting to change the way we teach science, the way we introduce science to students. And so my program, what I proposed back in 2006 and what is now growing by leaps and bounds now, is essentially what was to create a replica of my research lab as an undergraduate classroom. So, meaning that when I say my research lab, my research lab is sort of typical molecular biology lab. And the key feature of it is that it's the mixture of what we call wet lab, you know, your typical experimental lab and dry lab, computational. So virtually all labs now are a mix of computational analysis and then wet lab. But most of the labs that students are taking were just sort of the, as I was saying, traditional experimental labs. So this, I got the money from HHMI. I was awarded an HHMI professor and this program started at the University of Georgia. And now it is continuing and expanding at UC Riverside. It's called the dynamic genome courses. And what we do here is it's an alternative for the first introductory biology lab. This is what it evolved into. It wasn't always like this. You sort of, you know, like doing an experiment, it starts a certain way. There's iterations. Yeah. Yes, exactly. So what it is now is it's an alternative to the first quarter of introductory biology lab. And it's a beautiful building facility that we have. It's called the NLA Campbell Science Learning Lab. And it looks very much like a research lab. So essentially students are chosen essentially a random to take either this lab or the traditional biology lab. And we're doing an experiment. And there are many experiments like this going on in the country where if you want to improve something, where's the data? You know, you have to show that what you're doing is better than the traditional version. And the measure that we're using is sort of persistence and science. So what we're doing is we're introducing freshmen, how to design experiments. And we use transposable elements. So we use actual data from my lab for my research lab and students do projects as a team in the class. They do projects. Very simple projects, but projects where the result is not known where they bring to the task cutting edge technology, but very simple. And so the idea is to really excite students with how science is done in a real research situation before or while they're, you know, sitting in a lecture class, just sort of not doing anything. It's something called active learning and it's permeating a lot of science education in this country. And I think for the better. Sure. We'll season this sounds phenomenal. I know myself and I'm sure many of our listeners out there have had to sit through probably one to many kind of boring dry science lectures throughout the course of our career. And this sounds like a really great way to incorporate some of that excitement being in the lab, getting real hands-on experience with stuff that matters where like you said you don't know the answer. So very, very cool initiative. And I know it is some of the great opportunities that scientists get through their careers. There's a lot of opportunities to travel. So can you think back on all the places that you've been to for science and tell us about one of your favorite places and what was it about this place that made it so special. I work on DNA so I don't have to travel. My science is in the greenhouse and in the computer. So the only time that I travel and I travel a lot is to go to meetings or conferences. And usually when you go to meetings and conferences, you just sort of go to the meeting and then go home. But as a scientist, I'm attracted to so I'm going to answer your question, but not exactly the question you're asking. So I choose a lot of places to travel with my husband that are interesting from a scientific point of view. So actually I took my daughter as many years ago to Africa. And we went for a couple of weeks and one of my favorite places was the Okavanga Delta, which is in Botswana, Zambia. It's in that whole area. And it's just absolutely fantastic to see the grasses that I work on in my lab growing wild to see islands actually being formed. From De Novo, from termite mounds to see all the birds, just to see all the wildlife and essentially unspoiled nature, which still exists in many parts of the world. Fewer and fewer, but in Africa is a wonderful place for that. And then recently, like a couple of weeks ago, my husband and I went to Antarctica. Oh, wow. And that was absolutely mind-blowing fantastic. This was purely for vacation. We went on a really nice boat with a balcony. And it was just like going to another world. There were penguins and humpback whales and so much ice. I had not realized that, you know, Antarctica is, I mean, it's a continent, is on average there's four kilometers of ice covering the continent. 80% of the freshwater on this planet is locked up in Antarctica. And it was just spectacular to think that, you know, the only plants there are mosses and lichens. And I think there's one flowering plant. So it's a place where, I don't know how long it's been under ice, but, you know, there are a few insects there. I mean, no big animals except at the tips, you know, by the water. And it's just awesome. Absolutely awesome. Well, this sounds incredible. So I like that you picked two really different experiences going to Africa and going to Antarctica. And I think, you know, as a scientist and as someone who is maybe particularly interested in history and, you know, how these things kind of come together, these are some really phenomenal places to think about science and evolution and how things became the way they are. Exactly. And I think a lot of when I teach students, one of the goals is to really, I mean, it's a big goal, but to change the way they look at the world. Because I know that's what science has done for me. I mean, knowing how evolution works or at least, you know, to the depth that we understand and knowing how organisms have diversified means that you just look at the world differently. And that's sort of a struggle at the time. Well, also depressed a lot of the time. That's true. We went to the Amazon over the summer and we went to a part of the Amazon. It was just estimated. I mean, it just the forest was gone. There were very few birds. It was really sad. I mean, that's sort of, I think for all of us as scientists, that's what so sad that just as we're understanding how organisms diversify, just as we're, you know, understanding how life started and all of this, we're trashing it all out. It's really sad. Certainly. I think travel is one of these eye opening things that you can do in your life where you see so many amazing things, but yet at the same time as you're describing, some things that are deeply troubling and sad. But I think regardless, you know, it's very enriching experience and scientists, like you said, do get some great opportunities to travel through a conferences, but you're right. Oftentimes you are just kind of stuck in the conference hall for those trips. We'll see wonderful to hear about some of your favorite travel experiences. And I know scientists over the course of their career, not only do they get to travel, but they get to work with a lot of amazing people. And this may happen kind of over the course of your career, all these different labs that you work in and each of the labs that you work in has its own little personality. And so, I think that's a lot of times quirky traditions develop where there's just some funnier fond memories that you've shared with these people. So can you tell us today about one of these traditions that you've experienced or even just a funny science memory of yours? No, I've tried to think about this. I don't really have anything that I can think of. I mean, the only thing is, you know, every year we'd have a holiday party. And there was a gag gift. Pictures from years and years of really strange gifts that people would make out of lab equipment and stuff like that. So that's about it. I think, you know, it was just a good time when I started a bunch of professors on the floor would have coffee every day. You know, we'd sit around and have coffee and talk, not sit around, stand around, whatever. And it was just a wonderful way to start a day. And sort of what I was saying before about, it's often not like that anymore. It's sort of like in Britain, they would have tea at four o'clock or something. I think we need to get back to a lot of that, but I don't think it's going to happen because I think that kind of interchange where you're relaxed and you're just sort of not thinking about, you're not tense or whatever. That sort of interchange promotes creative thought. And I think there's far too little of that going on now because things are much more serious than they used to be. Certainly. I remember myself in graduate school. There's always a Friday, happy hour that people just kind of hang out and talk and you're absolutely right. There's some great ideas that go back and forth or even just kind of verbalizing what's troubling you. What's on your mind? You know, kind of smart something. Or things that you think are great ideas and then you realize they're not. Right. Someone stops you before you invest too much in it. Exactly. We'll see what wonderful to hear that your research group at least is kind of continuing to get together, have fun with these holiday parties and get a little fun gag gifts for each other. And I like this tradition of coffee in the morning. I think that's a great way to kind of start your day, get some ideas flowing before you get in the lab. So I love talking to scientists about these big traditions and fun things that they've done with labs over the course of their careers. But I also like to chat about the big questions in your mind. And we've talked about some of the research that you've done. But we haven't yet talked about some of the research that you would still like to do. So can you tell us if we gave you everything? See if things like funding and staff and technology and feasibility. We're not an issue. What is the one question that you aren't dying to know the answer to? Well, you know, a couple of years ago we discovered something in our lab, which was essentially we found that this strain of rice had a transposable element in it. And it was just bursting. It was increasing its copy number massively. And we've been following that for 10 years and it's been really cool. And the technology is around to allow us to really look at things. And I think technology is something that you can ask the same question for 30 years. And you keep advancing the understanding because the technology changes. And so what I want to know is what we found in rice, this one strain where this transposable element is increasing its copy number massively. I'm sure it's going on in many other populations around the world. And I would like to be, you know, the way you would address this is basically a lot of sequencing, a lot of sequencing of DNA, which can get costly. It's less and less costly as the years go by. But basically identify populations and they could be animals, they can be plants, they can be whatever. And sequence the hell out of it. And you could identify these, what we call these bursts of transposal. And that's what I'd like to do. And what I'd like to know is, are there transposable elements in organisms responding by increasing their copy number by becoming more active. So it's known that in some experimental situations, transposable elements become more active when the organism is stressed. And the biological story behind this or the speculation is that when an organism is in trouble, when a population is in trouble, it needs to sort of scramble up its genome. It needs to diversify its genome so that it can possibly adapt to increased temperature, decreased temperature, decreased oxygen, whatever. So it's sort of this crapshoot that this is the model that we know transposable elements exist in all organisms. And as I said at the beginning is we think that the reason they exist is just because they can. You don't need a reason for something to exist. If it has a way to increase its copy number and the organism can't stop it, and the organism is not killed by it. It'll keep increasing its copy number. But the question then is, you know, it's also creating diversity in the organisms in which it's increasing its copy number. It's inserting pieces of DNA and changing the expression of the organism's genes. And so we know in many cases that this diversity allows the population to adapt to be more adaptive. So the question really is, is the climate change that is going on so quickly? Is it impacting the movement of transposable elements in both plants and animals? It's a big question. Very interesting. So do you think these sort of bursts in transposable elements or maybe additional copy numbers? Do you think they have any link to disease or is this something that's more of an evolutionary scale? No, no, they're known to cause disease. And you know, a piece of DNA inserting into a gene in our genome. I mean, there are examples of hemophilia. So there's an element in humans called allu. It's a small, you know, like 300 base pair transposable element. And there are about a million copies of this element in our genome. Only about a hundred of them have the ability to still move around. And it's known that there are examples of human disease, like neurofibromatosis, like hemophilia, where the disease is caused by the insertion of a transposable element in a gene. So we know that just like any mechanism that causes mutations, they can do bad things and good. Very, very interesting, Sue. I think this is a great question. And exciting to hear that you're at least sort of moving in the direction of being able to answer it, in one population and one species. So very cool. So we've had some fantastic discussions today, but I would like to end on just one last piece of advice, Sue, or maybe one little sentence of inspiration that you can share with our listeners today. I think that when I started out in science, somebody sort of was taking credit for something that I did. And it really pissed me off. And one of my friends said that I shouldn't worry about it. They basically said, you know, you did this before and you'll do it again. And I think the kind of positive attitude, you know, there are lots of examples in history, and I'm not saying that my example is historic, but there are lots of examples in history where people, you know, were screwed in some way, and they never let it go. And I think that it's really important to let things go. Not everything, obviously, but just move on and have enough confidence in yourself, you know, that if you've been screwed somehow, it'll change that you did this before and you could do it again. So that's sort of my advice, just move on. Don't dwell on the negative if you don't have to. Well, wonderful advice, Sue, and great to have these conversations with you. I think you've provided a lot of great information and inspiration for myself and a lot of our listeners out there. So can you tell us how we can get in touch to learn more about you and your research? Probably the best way I don't do Facebook, my daughter's do Facebook and everybody younger than I do do. But it's just my email, which is Susan dot wessler WES SLER at ucr.edu. Fantastic. Well, listeners definitely reach out to Sue. If you have any particular questions and Sue, thank you so much for joining us today and sharing your story. You're very welcome. And thank you to our listeners out there. Join us again next time for another episode of People Behind the Science. Your voyage to the lives of today's exceptional scientists has just begun. You can find everything we talked about today, including our guest's favorite books, biographies, photos, and more when you visit us at www.peoplebehindtheScience.com. I look forward to seeing you next time on People Behind the Science.