 Hi everyone and thanks for joining me for episode 790 of the People Behind the Science Podcast. Today we're looking forward to revisiting our interview with our guest, Dr. Satesh Badaisi. We know that many aspects of human health are linked with conditions in our environment, and Satesh's research aims to identify and understand environmental factors that can impact human health, both positively and negatively. He shares stories about his research, his career, and his life in our interview, and I hope you enjoy this episode of People Behind the Science. Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNeely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to another episode of The People Behind the Science Podcast. Today I am delighted to introduce you to our guest scientist, Dr. Satesh Badaisi. So, Satesh, welcome to our show today. How are you? Thank you very much for having me. I'm doing well and I hope that you and everyone listening is also doing well. I'm doing well myself and I'm looking forward to sharing some of your stories, your experiences, and your insights with our listeners today. But before we jump into those details, I want to take a moment to give them a little bit of background. So, listeners, Satesh is a professor of public health and preventative medicine, as well as assistant dean for graduate studies at St. George's University in Grenada. He's also an adjunct professor in the Center for Global Health at Old Dominion University and a visiting professor at Chakkaara University in India, as well as Cassett Start University in Thailand. Satesh received his doctor of veterinary medicine degree from the University of the West Indies, St. Augustine campus, a master of science degree in public health from St. George's University and a doctor of education degree from the University of Sheffield. Now, prior to joining the faculty there at St. George's University, Satesh held a position at the University of Trinidad in Tobago, as well as at the Ministry of Health in Trinidad in Tobago. Satesh is a fellow of the World Society of Public Health, the World Society of Tropical Medicine in Hygiene, the International Society on Infectious Diseases, and also the Society of Biology, as well as Board Certified by the United States National Board of Public Health Examiners. An inner interview today, Satesh is going to share some of his experiences both in life and in science, so Satesh, we're looking forward to getting to know you both as a scientist and also just in general as a person, so can you start by telling us how you like to spend your time when you're not doing science? Besides work, my childhood passion and what I've been able to enjoy throughout my life and the start is aviation. I have an interest in aircrafts, I love flying, privately of course, and I enjoy particularly flying in the Caribbean region. Excellent, so how did you get into aviation? Well, my uncle was a pilot and as a kid, there was some interest, I believe, where he would take me flying with a small sense, no ones have been to aircraft, and that experience just got me very comfortable in the air, but also I was able to appreciate the fact that aviation is a privilege which I'm thankful for on one that I sort of had my eyes on while even engaging science. So somehow I never lost trap of that aviation interest, so what a positive science on my career, I continued to explore the interest and when the time came, received my license and certification and I could do to fly as a hobby. Very cool, so how long have you had your pilot's license? For almost a decade now. Oh wow, so you've got quite a few flights under your belt, right? Awesome, well great to hear a little bit more about some of your passions outside the world of science, but I would love to talk about your research next. So Satish, can you tell us how you describe what you do to someone who is maybe not familiar with your field? Well my positionality in public health and public health research is that human health is inextricably linked with the environment and from that position I tend to identify factors in the environment that influence human health both in a positive way as well as a negative way. Very interesting and I know you do a wide variety of research projects within the work that you're doing and I'm looking forward to chatting more about those as we go through our interview, but I would love to chat a little bit first about what motivates you. I think as a scientist there's a lot on the to-do list most of the time, so I'm always looking for a little bits of motivation and sayings and quotes that can help me throughout my day. Do you have a favorite one of yours? What comes to my mind is a code that I would love. Who has code from my grandparents days, ongoing life, they would have reminded me of it, a week period of time, and it's stuck with me. And essentially it suggests that what you can do tomorrow, do today, and what you can do today, do it now. The idea is a time is precious and tomorrow is never promised. So what you can focus on in the present time, that's the only time that you have to really get your tasks done or achieve any particular dream or aspiration you may have. Well, Satesh, I love that quote and I must say procrastination is something that I am very guilty of. Oftentimes it's so tempting and so easy to just kind of keep putting things off till tomorrow, so what helps you prevent that procrastination? I think it might have been my life experiences as a teenager. I lost my mom in a vehicle accident and that was a traumatic experience in me. It also appreciated the fragility of life. And then I also was very injured during a time when I had to recover as well. And also some years ago I was diagnosed and has since recovered from testicular cancer as well. And these experiences have encouraged me to really value time, really value life. So when I think about the tasks I have, when I think about time I have, it reduces the likelihood of me procrastinating. Definitely. Well, thank you for sharing some of these major life experiences that have kind of shaped the person you are today and how you approach life. And I think listeners, this is an important message. Seize the day. Don't keep putting things off till tomorrow because you never know how many tomorrow's you've got in the bucket. I'm curious now that we've heard a little bit about what inspires you to hear more about who inspires you. So, Satesh, are there people who really rise up in your mind as inspirational figures or maybe mentors who had a big impact on you? My mom was probably one of my biggest and my earliest mentor, especially in influencing my scientific inquiry and interests. And this is so much how the things as a four, five year old kid I remember with my mom, I got to know it was an etymology and the work she was focused on was controlling a milliburg of fungus for plants which affected both food crops and botanicals. And her work included examining biological control for the milliburg. So, there was a ladybird to control the milliburg and eventually they also used a wash to control the ladybird and that entire experience fascinated me. It fascinated me in terms of the fieldwork examine sites where the milliburg was proliferating and then releasing with biological agents in an effort to control them and eventually the project was quite successful. So, that experience really got me interested in the ability to use science to solve problems. It also inculcated my mind, my own ability to ask questions. So, somehow I assumed a persona where people began referring to ask questions. So, this idea of asking questions emerged from that least experiences with my mom. And in the Caribbean islands a lot of our activities include farming in our cultural communities. So, my questions also was involving the practice of our culture when it's food crops with its animal production. So, I would apply these questions to the person that I was encountering on a routine basis, which included farmers who were farming animals, for example. Why are animals having diseases? Why are some great faster than others, for example? Why are they eating what they're eating? And all these questions allowed me to develop an alternative of natural world. And this encouraged me to learn more and the knowledge that I was learning along the way I began to really identify that knowledge as a result of science. So, that somehow developed my inquiry, developed my interests, of course my projected path in the area of science. So, Lillie, so I'm curious, a taste, did you ever consider pursuing the science of entomology or maybe the science of aviation in flight? Well, the aviation smear was always a passion. In the Caribbean there is very limited school for major careers in aviation beyond the local and regional airlines. And they are very limited in things of their own capacity as well. So, I never necessarily saw aviation as a sustainable park with itself, but science certainly is well accepted and we do have many institutions and organizations of higher education and science, whether it's governmental agencies or private industry as well. So, science seemed at that time a more sustainable approach towards a career. Gotcha. So, can you tell us a little bit about how you went from this curious kid asking tons of questions it sounds like to where you are today? What are some of these key moments that took you to where you are now? So, in high school we were exposed to the various that was the opposite areas from mathematics, the language, the science, to history, the geometry, to computer science, the liberal arts, we were exposed. But I believe some of the main recollections that I have for my high school days were experiences in the laboratory for example. I said things are wrong and observing the heart of the frog at least or contracting while we have completely rendered the animal dead. And even if the questions and balls and recognises the heart itself, the heart must have just you, it has a life only marked the death and things of being myotonic and understand that context. So, that experience would have really fostered my interest in biology and that event allowed me to think about the biology of discipline and the way we package science subjects together in the Caribbean that you have to take one as a group. So, biology always was a group with chemistry physics, mathematics, then I decided to put a group of subjects in your sciences and then from high school and at that time as a middle-aged teenager thinking about career choices, reflecting on my experiences with my mother and my mother passed away at that time and that as a part of honoring her memory and her life may have given me a value association with sort of pursuing a part in zoology. And that zoology interests then was expanded and explored further in the irreventimateous and looking at all aspects of animal health from an acrometer zoology and everything in between. And in fact, in medicine, as I began to study and practice veterinary medicine, I got involved in food safety, as soon as I got involved in understanding the linkage between humans and animals and the positive bonds that exist by companionship, for example. And that really got me interested in public health. Sometimes, for example, in veterinary medicine, we will synchronize issues and that the idea is for all of these animals to present on heat collectively so they can be fertilized as a group, they can be processed as a group of production purposes as well. We work with companion animals and the idea is to promote the well-being of the animals, but at the same time you're also advocating for human well-being because humans are getting close to animals, having companionship with animals, promotes stress management, it increases health life style because you're exercising with your animals as well. So that took me to public health, it took me to really exploring more how we can support the human animal bond as well as mitigate the risk factors that animals may cause the humans, especially from food safety, assumed oil infectious diseases. And then, when I got into public health, now I realized that in human health in general, we know what the problems are and we know what the solutions are, but the gap is in effecting adequate behavior. And when I studied behavior, you know, I'm trying to see how I can influence and encourage behavior, I came across the social sciences and the social scientists speak about knowledge, attitudes, perceptions, KAP and how that translates into behavior. In that, people behave based on how they perceive something, based on the attitude towards that. And your perception and your attitude is a function of your knowledge of your understanding. So I tried then to interbeat in informing behaviors by influencing actions and perceptions through education. That then led me to consider learning about the science and the methodologies and the competencies that's involved in education as well. So my education, my tree, and the people from Vietnamese medicine, public health, the education. And I see that as the tools that I need to understand the risk factors that affect human health and then intervene, whether these interventions are clinically, whether they are environmentally, whether they are behavioral. Absolutely. Well, it's been wonderful to hear almost the train of thought that led from one step to the next along your career path. And I think in hindsight, it's easy to make things sound like everything went smoothly. And it was all very logical how you were making these different transitions. But was it difficult for you to decide to go back for this sort of second and third in many cases, terminal degrees? It's difficult for one extent because the difficulty lies in the effort and the time and the examination and the thesis and the defense. Right. So that was a difficult part. But in spite of the difficulty, the ambition and the interest in getting to a point that you feel will be valuable to you, personally, that would have already been any particular difficulty that I may have to see. Definitely. Well, I absolutely admire your determination to secure this additional training beyond that initial veterinary degree. And I think for me, it was hard enough to go through my dissertation once. I couldn't imagine doing three different ones. I'm quite impressed. And we've talked about the different steps that took you to your career today. But I'd love to talk next about one of these projects you're working on. I know you're kind of working on everything from public health to infectious disease to food safety. And you mentioned a couple different areas. What is something that's ongoing right now in your lab that you are just the most excited about? Just before I joined this conversation with you, I was speaking with some of my research colleagues about a study on hierarchy and Dr. Wright known as on Dengue. Now, Dengue is virus. It's known. It's established. Dengue isn't dengue in the tropical region, and even including tropical regions. And more than 50% of the worst population is at risk of exposure, at least. But we know a lot about Dengue, but there's some aspect that we're not familiar with. One of the aspects that we consider knowledge gap towards probably affecting treatment and understanding that the pathologist disease is exploring dengue exposure in people who do not come from dengue and dengue regions. That means mostly studies done on dengue usually happen with dengue exists. And that makes sense. But we have an opportunity here at St. George's University where our students come from past the world, including non-endemic areas. So recently, as in the past three weeks, we have been working with students who are not exposed to dengue and they are now in Grenada for the first time in an endemic region and they are being exposed. So we are exploring the immune response to dengue of persons who are being exposed to the full state. And that response will sort of help us to understand the population characteristics of dengue, for example, in the endemic region of dengue less than 20% of persons that devote clinical science are actually presenting themselves clinically. That means that over 80% of persons that are exposed to dengue do not have clinical science. That's one aspect. So we try to figure out what will be the immune response and also what are the types, the different types that involve, and the different types are providing different immune responses and reactions to the bodies, but restarting them off first of all with persons who have never been exposed before. And we hope that we will learn more about the immune response. We hope that we will also figure out for those that are exposed what does that mean in terms of the different types of dengue will they be exposed to multiple types? Will they have different percentages of clinical symptoms based on these exposures over time? I see how that reflects into areas in the world in which the endemic status is known because everything we know about dengue is based on populations that are already exposed. And with people traveling around the world now we will have people who are not exposed being exposed over time. So we will try to learn more about dengue in terms of the immunologically naive populations that exist. Well this is fascinating and sort of an angle of the question of infectious disease that I hadn't really considered looking at these origins from endemic or non-endemic regions and that initial exposure. So I guess the question for me is does it stop at dengue or do you have other diseases lined up in the pipeline to come next? Well always when you think about that the more diseases that are infected or that the use of spreads then give us is the AIDS-Jupter-Eye Mosquito and with that infected they also spread other infectious diseases. So in the past we would have had all breaks of Zika virus that you can go to virus spread by this infection as well. And while these viruses are not currently circulating in the regional population we have other diseases in the horizon, I'm concerned about we have or put virus we have myarovirus which isn't South America and it's also spread by the AIDS-Jupter-Eye Mosquito. We also have cyclical episodes of yellow fever as well. So these are other sort of possibilities that make coincide with the vector and also with the dengue epidemic and endemic status that exists in the Caribbean regions and tropical regions in the world. So it's important for us to really appreciate and get an understanding of dengue because while other infectious diseases have come and gone dengue persists. Well thanks for sharing more about this current project. Very cool we're going on in your lab and we've talked about a lot of the great aspects of your career so far cetace but I think we haven't yet touched on a lot of the struggles and the challenges whether they're big failure moments or just these kind of day-to-day grind. So do you have a favorite failure or challenge or struggle that you faced in your career that you can share with us and maybe walk through how you got through it? There's always things as they're always showing you the plus. I have many examples but there's one that always sort of evokes my memory and my emotions when I think about some of the struggles that I've had in the year of research. So in Grenadow we have partnership with the nutmeg industry and Grenadow is very well known to nutmeg. It's considered a spice island as well and that's primary as result of nutmeg production. Now nutmeg is very much synonymous with Grenadow but we had some difficulty after Hurricane Ivan 2004 and that my production dropped but currently Grenadow is a third largest producer of nutmeg in the world. Oh wow. For a small island that's quite substantial. Now my role in the nutmeg industry is working with nutmeg workers themselves especially the processing workers. These are workers who receive the roll nut mix and then the process is nutmeg to market so it involves dry nutmegs, it involves different aspects of tight nutmegs sorting nutmegs out as well and preserving them for shipment. Now when you take a product like roll nutmeg in a tropical environment and you dry that nutmeg you also attract some mold growth in a nutmeg. And with this mold the product creates a lot of dust so we've conducted how the system of workers workers were complaining of poor snails or drip up a respiratory distress side of side this which is consistent with some type of airborne exposure and we made the link between the workers respiratory distress and the presence in the environment and exposure potential of the dust from the mold growth nutmegs. Coming out of that we worked with engineers and we were able to identify a potential solution which was solar dehydration. So we converted one of those shipping cow containers into a solar dehydrator. We got a fund to really develop this project. We had a pilot study festival and the pilot study demonstrated that our solar technology would reduce the time it takes and dry nutmegs by half the time to production and processing will be faster. And secondly when you can find the nutmegs in a solar dehydrator you're essentially preventing mold growth by controlling humidity etc. So we thought we found a solution where we were able to reduce the time it took to process nutmegs as well as mitigate the exposure to nutmeg workers to this more than dust. Right when when? Yes well that was exciting for us but here's where the challenge here now when we began to install the pilot solar dehydrator on the side of the processing plant and the nutmeg workers began to look the processing device itself. There was a lot of apprehensions and inertia on the part of the workers themselves and the unions got informed as well because there was a clear concern that the workers felt threatened and challenged they would be replaced by these solar dehydrators themselves. And that led to a lack of use for these solar dehydrator. Well the initial solar dehydrator that we implemented we worked with management of course of management were very excited about it and we had all the data and evidence to show for it and we were keen on preventing the stress risk of the stress of workers but we had a lot of reservations in the pilot workers and up to today that intervention was and is not accepted only for the workers. So here we had to identify a problem work towards solution but because of challenges in terms of worker acceptance which I appreciate and accept we were able to fully translate our science with the meaningful outcomes for these workers that remains a period and a point in time in my scientific life where I found solutions and it's difficult to apply the solution so that is very disgusting thing for me. Absolutely well thanks for sharing this story and I think it comes back to some of the elements of your training kind of getting back to the behavior change and the education and just the implementation of some of these programs like you said you found a solution but so tantalizingly close to being realized but there's some resistance and I think that is something where you really have to get in there in the community and understand what the resistance is and how work through some of those challenges so what was that process like? Well what we tried to do was really focus on the health and safety of workers so we did some workshop on training with these workers get them to become more aware change at some perception because the whole idea of knowledge is to change at some perceptions and inform behavior so we worked with developing a quality of health and safety and identifying strategies based on identified risk factors in the particular processing plant the workers we believe appreciated it but these workers themselves that their skills at the community in which that person can plan beyond that community is not most of my best-sensing so there was a lot of cultural traditional social type of institutionalization that of the traditional that make processing practices itself and as much as we could within our own limitations it would have taken changing the culture and society of our community and that I think would have been an overwhelming task of all parts so we accept and we have appreciated the difficulties in implementing the technology and the techniques that we proposed so based on that we continue to have a partnership with the workers themselves we continue to monitor the health of course we try to identify ways in which to increase the protective equipment try to modify the environment to an extent in terms of changing ventilation strategies as well trying to manage more and a control manner the humidity effect as well of the nutmegs itself and with the reduce as much as we can the moral growth on the workers exposure but there are still the expose of course but having said that though we are trying to find other ways in which we can reduce the adverse health effects of the moral and thus in the environment well so Teyush this is a difficult and complex conundrum you've described here so thanks for sharing it with our listeners today just to kind of show some of the difficulties that scientists face like you said you might come up with a solution but implementation is not always easy and certainly cannot happen overnight in almost all cases but we don't just want to talk about the difficulties though I'd love to hear about one of your success stories next so the Caribbean region all population is continuing to convert towards more crime disease movements and while my research focus particularly in first half of my career my life and sciences but in primary infectious diseases in fact we cannot help but also engage in crime disease management because the number one through five courses of mobility and mortality in the Caribbean region are crime diseases okay it's your cancers it's your diabetes it's your heart disease it's your strokes for example and as a result of that the population is affected with diabetes for example and diabetes is one part of it we know how to prevent an android of course but it's a complications that is most concerning for me what I mean by that is with diabetes you develop peripheral neuropathy you begin to lose sensation in your low limbs and extremities for example and a lot of these communities are farming communities are farmers affected by them so they have a feed for example in boots or their barefoot in the soil environment they get cuts and wounds and these wounds eventually develop infections become ganty us and the only solution to save their life is amputations currently great on several other Caribbean islands we are on the list of the top countries that have the most number of amputations put capital associated diabetes complications oh wow and that's a problem because when we explore and examine these amputies their life expectancy is 3 to 5 years post amputation they receive social isolation they become unemployed they lose their income they develop further respect for other countries using fluently obesity they have a very poor collective life the Caribbean community from the working environment the public infrastructure is not well conducive the persons with disabilities so access to even healthcare becomes more compromised so there is a significant problem especially among the amputee populations serenary to diabetic complications so from that perspective we try to intervene we conduct studies looking at the trends over time of diabetics prevalence of diabetics prevalence of complications of diabetes as well as amputations we partnered with if switch university in the righty kingdom and if switch university have what they call an ip switch touch to test whether use a micro filament and the micro filament is used to screen for persons with this peripheral neuropathy or loss sensation especially in their toes and their feet now in the greater in the Caribbean islands it's difficult to administer microfilaments to the community members to conduct tests on their own so what we were able to adapt and adopt on our local setting was instead of a micro filament we do a tool that we work around every day at all so we developed a national campaign around world diabetes the where we educated we developed flyers we developed YouTube video clips we went to the television radio school with community centers and we assisted persons in conducting what we call a touch to test which is taking a thing else but someone else has that benefit test for you the person have to extend their limbs on a chair or a heightened surface someone else needs to press gently on randomly selected toes for example and if there were any lack of sensation the person would not indicate by raising their hand for example so during a time we developed national campaigns and we do not consistently around world diabetes day which occurs in the month of november and every time we do this we first of all identify suspect cases and that's around the community anyone can do to the community and if you think you are suspect company health center let's confirm it we consistently receive over to the 300 persons that have a suspect case oh wow eventually we able to confirm about 50 of them or so that have perfect property since that time we have a cohort of persons now that we have a footcare program that we're working with and that footcare program is actually the same when we wash our hands in our face every day wash your feet look after your feet examine it clean it if you have a cut or wound have that attended to immediately by health care professional so we have a quarter persons and we work with them towards their foot health we have a nice slogan love the feet you work with for example and the idea is to have these persons never require a limb amputation as a result of their complications and as a result of any peripheral property that they already have so we want to work with them continue to work with them to prevent injuries and prevent infections and of course prevent amputations since at that time we have not had any one of our 150 persons thus far that's in our cohort most single one then I've had a need for an amputation so you want to keep it at me we want to live an extender period of time live a productive life and not have a need for amputations and suffer the I lose consequences as a result so we find a lot of benefits but a lot of success in a national community participatory project we have perceived any communities at least identifies as spec cases which they health care providers then confirm and if they are confirmed cases we have a follow-up program for them towards their foot care and it's a wonderful opportunity for us to reduce the burden of peripheral property secondary to diabetes and of course have these continue to live productive lives which for everyone requires a use of your feet as well. Certainly well, so take congratulations on this success I must say this idea of having the self-screening the finger toe touch test I think is awesome and it's something like you said that's way more accessible than some of the other clinical tests that are out there and it sounds like this type of program this type of campaign and intervention has the potential to have a big impact on people not only just in the Caribbean and you mentioned this collaboration with group in Ipswich as this sort of something that you're looking at maybe expanding even further. You know it's a fact if students you will see they have piloted this approach even at the clinical site in the hostels. Oh wow and they're finding a lot of benefits and even this thing of this touch foot test as a basic screen is not confirmed by any means of course but it's just a basic screen to identify the spec cases which you can confirm later on. That is amazing thanks so much for sharing it with me and our listeners today and we've talked about a lot of aspects of your career and I think we focused a little bit on the science and some of the work that you're doing in the lab but we've talked a little bit about your passions outside of science as well and for me one of my passions is reading so I love getting book recommendations from everyone that we feature on our program so it's a taste can you add to our book list today with either a book that you've liked that's a science-related book or a non-science-related book. I think I may want to grab it it towards a non-science book. Excellent. Post-possibly consume high science-related reading but I think one of the most impactful read experiences over time has really been non-science-related it's almost like a relaxation like a release sometimes to read non-science and I can probably think about multiple different publications different books different reading opportunities that really highlights to me when there was one particular you know it's more like an essay than a book to be honest with you and this essay was first given to me by my mentor and mentor at Schaffel University who gave me this essay to read even before I began working on my thesis and essentially the essay was entitled on book I like it and it was by Harry G. Frankfurt Professor von Princeton University and that book essentially tracks to provide some commentary on understanding that in life and work out there there's both all around us and you have to first of all one recognize that identified and also work with it because that is a reality and no matter what we do in science in life we have to sometimes work with it work in spite of it and that essay really began my formalized engagement with a human experience and control of books which the essay speaks about I actually have been inspired so much by this that I even shared with my students though as a tradition that's awesome and we have discussions on it because it's good for us to understand from day one that we all want to recognize what this means we all appreciate what that also suggests to our science to our life and also the development strategies towards how we can work around it sometimes so I actually would encourage persons to consider and it's free you can actually google it and you can contact me I have a PDF document but Harry G. Frankfurt has a website and it's all there as well so I would encourage listeners to certainly access this resource and see if they can find value in that particular publication which I found in my life which impacts my science as well as my books and all life. Well so T.H. I'm going to have to check this out I must say while our world is wonderful it is far from perfect and I think no matter where you go you're going to encounter some BS so this is something that is great for our listeners and I love that it's freely accessible so listeners definitely check this out we'll put it on our website as well so you can find it easily and we've talked about some of the different aspects of your career as a scientist and I think one of the things we've sort of hinted at are some of the opportunities that you get to travel in the work that you do in some of these adjunct appointments that you have so today's can you share with us your favorite travel memory your favorite travel moment from your career as a scientist. Fortunately as a result of science of how many opportunities to travel in the end scientists do benefit from that as well and we need that because a lot of our science science is quite universal science is repeatable it's forceifiable these are the principles of science and regardless of where the world science is almost like an asset to the language regardless of different cultures different languages different geographies scientists when they get together they can understand they can relate and they can collaborate so certainly traveling and interacting with people and partnering is critical in science it is really not an individual effort anymore science is really a team based approach and the team that we need our world we share problems together and we need to share solutions and share strategies together and that is only encourage supported to travel and fortunately as well for me I've been able to travel across all the continents around the world but one of my favorite places to visit and one of my favorite sites to collaborate with is Cassette South University in Sakon Nakhon in Thailand they have a wonderful opportunity where they explore human health aspects with the environmental animal health as well which really brings in the concept of one health from practical perspectives now Sakon Nakhon is a northeast province in Thailand and in that region there's a very strong agricultural presence and with agriculture there's farming there are communities there's animals and that allows for us to really see the challenges as well as opportunities to examine disease burdens so we have been looking at parsed diseases for example in animals as a result of food safety concerns we have been looking at the ways in which we can promote the whole sustainable use of land towards water quality towards towards land use and our products for human benefit so this idea of exploring human interactions with animals in the environment have been really impressed unfortunately to partner with colleagues at Cassette University for this particular food post as well one of the specifics that I'm familiar with there is also looking at the age all disease of disease the release has been written historically where humans have fatal consequences as a result of being full city bite for rabbit dog for example and there is an opportunity to work especially in highly densely populated areas in Southeast Asia to manage the burden of rabies or rabies is a highly preventable disease because you can vaccinate the animal reservoirs for rabies especially the domestic dog and to vaccination trade dog control programs we can certainly place a lot of effort and they arrive a lot of benefits towards human health the cost for one mile of rabies vaccine is about 1000 and they cost it will take to treat a case and that case you have even be treatable depending on the stage in which is presented as well that's remarkable yeah so I actually find a lot of practical applications and foreseeable benefits as a result of the one health related work that we parsed in with our partners in Sakona, Konant Island phenomenal so what was it about Thailand that initially drew your interest to start this collaboration well Saint George University is an international university and we have faculty students from 140 countries are on top oh wow one of the partners with us is Mahle University of Thailand and we have students we have faculty we have students visit Thailand for research opportunities sure the time that I've been working with Saint George University we have been able to meet colleagues and develop partnerships with the conferences and as a result of these discussions and collaborations event has led to specific projects based on particular needs and interests as well well it's a stage awesome project and it's great to hear that you're able to really have this global presence working with people all around the world on some of the research projects that you do and I love that you touched on just how phenomenal some of these people are and these some of these collaborations that you've formed because I think the idea of science as a team sport is not something that everyone thinks about and just this idea of being able to meet wonderful people from all over the world and maybe break some of the stereotypes that people have about what scientists are like and what life as a scientist is like is phenomenal and you've already shared this tradition of giving this wonderfully recommended essay to some of the students in your laboratory but are there other traditions or memories or just fun or funny experiences that you've shared with some of these people you've worked with that really highlight this human side of science. Funny enough what I'm going to share with you and your listeners to me is embarrassing I have to leave but some people do find some humor and essentially it was in my time and trip that where we are from working on an animal disease control and one of the tasks that I had as a particular case was to attend a farm in community and work with a farmer to explore what is considered a sub-clinical you know truck infection in cows it means that they're not necessary displaying clinical signs what you see some evidence for example we will see some some trading the urine frequently reneasions for example and the idea is to help us with the diagnosing we need a urine sample especially a mid-stream urine sample which means that the animal has to be urinating and during the course of the stream of the urination you collect the sample now when I went at the time the farmer had the cold furaging so I could not collect the sample at time so I gave the farmer the urine collection cup and I indicated the farmer that please when you get a chance I will pass that refrigerated with you to collect the sample of course sure sure but please collect a mid-stream sample of urine for me and that we are in then determine what are some of the debris or the findings the determine if in fact is a urine infection so that same day maybe the afternoon period you were two or three hours after I returned to the farmer and the farmer was unable to collect the urine sample for me oh no so on a ukuri I asked the farmer why and farmer responded to me that he did not have time take the cold in the river oh my goodness a mid-stream sample I actually felt there's two bit of your energy because here I was with an assumption that the farmer knew but honestly it was my fault because there was a gap in communication I should have effectively articulated the request to the farmer and I failed to do so that experience was actually a significant lesson for me and I've never forgotten it's a significant memory when I share to people it's funny for them and me it's a constant hungry experience as it allows me to remind myself that my communication must be very effective I no matter in what situation or who am I speaking with if my information is not trans but effectively well then that was another effective communication at all so the idea is for me personally to keep it in myself off that to hopefully not repeat that mistake again well I love this story Satesh I must say that's something where I think scientists are always trying to be mindful of using jargon and when they're communicating with the public and it's something that some of these things that you just take for granted that you don't even think about as being jargon that you have to constantly be mindful and watchful of that yes exactly well were you able to eventually get the sample I must ask well this farm was able to talk me after I corrected my errors so the story has a happy ending too which is even better well Satesh wonderful story to share with our listeners and we've talked about some of the different challenges and some of the things that you've faced in terms of getting the research done in the field that you're in and I think for every scientist there's always something standing in the way between them and being able to address that dream question or to get the project done whether that's funding or staff or technology or feasibility or even time so is there a particular question Satesh that you've been just dying to answer but haven't been able to tackle yet I'm reminding my own mortality for my own cancer experiences and I continue to look at people who are fighting for surviving and that does occupy a lot of my community service look it does occupy a lot of my interests and my desire to keep working in places in Africa and I believe the question I always remains in my mind is is there a particular marker is there a particular type of biochemical derivative that we could identify that is consistent with cancers and allow that to inform the technology and the treatment which we can use a trinoff apoptosis or program cell death among these new plastic or cancer cells I'm very passionate about that and I know there's a lot of research going on in that regard and we are looking at ways the diagnosed cancer earlier we are looking at ways in which we can affect the staging of cancer treatment we are looking at different strategies towards therapeutic management and treatment as well and that continues ongoing but I share those questions my particular question is can we identify a commonality that exists among these changing cells and target that commonality using a strategy I mean we talk about programs cell death and chemotherapy radiation therapy all of these what they do essentially is target rapidly green cells and if there's a way in which we can find a solution for that I will particularly be very happy about and I know that cancer is already the number one cause for many countries and eventually for the world it will be the number one cause of death and morbidity and it's not as an individual effect with the text families the text communities the text countries as well so I believe that the question that will help individuals families communities and populations at large is is there a strategy effectively killer cancer without even compromising the health of the patient as well because sometimes we bring patients closer death in order to kill the cancer right I think sometimes the side effects of the treatments are so severe that patients sometimes decide not to undergo the treatment at all which is devastating exactly so I'm really interested in finding a strategy to target specifically those cells and leave the health itself alone and just focus on that programmatic cell death for those changing cells itself I'm pretty so interested in that question well Satesh this is a big question I'm sure it's on a lot of people's minds these days because you brought up a good point that as time goes on as our life expectancy continues to increase cancer is becoming a bigger and bigger problem that a lot of people are facing in their own lives so finding this silver bullet solution I think would be just phenomenal so great question for me and our listeners to ponder today and you've shared so much in terms of some of your insights your stories in your advice I'd love for you to give our listeners one last piece of advice perhaps the best piece that you've ever received in your own life the best piece of advice that I've received my own life was probably from my own interpretation of how I incorporated aviation into my philosophy and I share my students all the time when you think about flying an aircraft for example if you want to increase your altitude you have to increase your power and you have to bring your nose up you have to lift the nose then it's actually and you're trying if you want to descend you reduce your power and you drop your nose and you will descend so somehow your nose position in an aircraft determines your altitude determines whether you are maintaining level flight if you are climbing or if you are essentially losing altitude no the orientation of the nose for aviation is called attitude the aircraft's attitude where there's a nose altitude or a nose don't attitude and what that principle of flight what it suggests to me is depending on your nose position or your attitude it determines your altitude okay and many times when we think about our destination life or the altitude or the heights we reach in life and personally or in science or otherwise many people think it's all based on your knowledge it's all based on your aptitude it's all based on your competencies etc and that's important yes but fundamentally for me is also your attitude so if I want to extrapolate from my aviation interest and experience and apply that to inspiration for your listeners I would suggest that it is your attitude and not just your attitude which determines your altitude I love it so it's a wonderful message to give our listeners and I learned something new today I didn't realize that the attitude was the term for that so very cool yeah that's awesome so is there any other last message you want to leave our listeners with today I just really think science science is not just a career it's not just a discipline science is a human endeavor it's part of our immediate interest you know over time with history we have looked at the sun in moon and the stars they explain realities for our lives what really is understanding from my reference point is astrology we try to explain to know when on on it is by looking at the influence of the planets for example people still read their heart stoop study as a result of that and then over time as we learn more hypocrite for example brought the constant health and disease down to earth he said you help us based on the airs the waters and the clear seers then over time as you are we live about malaria malairia means bad air because we thought that disease as a result of bad air or bad smells and then we developed technology like microscope for example to look at microorganisms and over time we have been able as part of human development as part of social evolution that has informed our knowledge our understanding I consider that to be science so my last note is that we are in a constant quest for knowledge for understanding for development and science that will enable us to do that whether it's laboratory science bench science whether it's medical sciences whether it's social sciences they all clear rule so I believe that each and every one of us have a part of play because we collectively will determine the future because our reality will eventually be expressed physically as well Hollywood is great at pretty good future right may times you see these movies books that you see will rule on that to be future for us and the future is in our minds what we perceive that to be our reality and science that will support this human endeavor going forward whether it's curing diseases whether it's taking flight beyond the planet for example is all science of health so I would encourage people to embrace it to participate in it because invariably from my perspective science is quintessentially human well so Tess a wonderful note and on I love that you highlighted this human side of science because that's something that we strive to show on our program and I couldn't agree with you more here so great message for our listeners and if our listeners want to learn more about you and all the wonderful work you're doing where should they go or how should they get in touch well feel free to go onto my university's website singlotus.edu.edu and there you can find me at the S.T.H.P.D.C. it's on the resource profile for example you'll find my background you'll find some projects I'm involved in as well as ways in which you can contact me to email to telephone for example as well but if I may just say my email address contact as well my Skype contact is satay.bdc which is my name with a dot in between the full sentence name satay.bdc and also if you want to email me you can email me S.Bdc S.B.I.D a.i.s.e. at sju.edu and I will be happy to engage and interact with your listeners I am where I am today because I have been fortunate the benefit from mentors in my life I've been able to stand on the shoulders of many giants and I believe in a cycle of life that I also need to do the same other people as well so I am willing and I'm happy in any way that I can serve the inspire the mentor and the partner people in any way in which they feel that I can contribute to as well. Wonderful well satay thank you so much for talking to all of us here today and for sharing some of your stories and listeners definitely get in touch if you have any questions it's been such a pleasure to speak with you thank you as well and I look forward to the opportunity for your series to continue to inspire persons and also to reinvigorate persons already in science. Well I sincerely appreciate that and listeners it's been great to have you with us here today we hope that you're leaving this interview inspired as well and we'll see you next time on another episode of People Behind the Science.