 Hey everyone, I'm excited to welcome you to episode 799 of People Behind the Science. Today we are revisiting our conversation with our guest Dr. Karen Strider. Listeners Karen is an accomplished primatologist who's working to better understand the biological basis of human behavior, evolution, and adaptation by studying some of our closest living relatives. In particular, she and her group have been observing a critically endangered primate, the Northern Marikai, in its natural habitat to understand how their behaviors are similar to or different from human behaviors. And in our interview, Karen shares some wonderful stories from her life and research. And I hope you enjoy this episode of People Behind the Science. Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNeely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to People Behind the Science. Today I am thrilled to speak with our guest researcher Dr. Karen Strider. So Karen, welcome to our show today. How are you? I'm fine. Thanks so much for having me. Well, thank you so much for joining today and I look forward to chatting with you about your work and some of your career experiences. But before we dive into those questions, let me first start by introducing you to our listeners. So listeners, Karen is the Vylas Research Professor and Urban Divorre Professor of Anthropology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. She received her bachelor's degree in sociology and anthropology and biology from Swarthmore College. She was awarded her master's degree in PhD in Anthropology from Harvard University and after completing her PhD, Karen served as a lecturer at Harvard University and subsequently became a faculty member at Bullight College. She joined the faculty at the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1989 and Karen has received numerous awards and honors throughout her career, including being elected as a fellow of the American Anthropological Association, a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, a member of the National Academy of Sciences, and a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In addition, she's an honorary member of the Latin American Society of Primatologists, an honorary member of the Brazilian Society of Primatologists, and she has received an honorary doctoral degree from the University of Chicago. Karen has been the recipient of the Presidential Young Investigator Award from the National Science Foundation, the H.I. Romney's Faculty Fellowship, the Caledon Midcareer Faculty Research Award, and Wharf Professorship from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, the Hilldale Award for Excellence in Teaching, Research, and Public Service from UW-Madison, and also the distinguished Primatologist Awards from the American Society of Primatologists and the Midwest Primate Interest Group. She is currently the President of the International Primatological Society, and in our interview, Karen, we are going to learn more about both you as a scientist, but also you as a person. So can you start by telling us what you like to do in your free time? What free time? That's the real question. But when I do have free time, I love to see you. I love being outside. I love nature. I love exercise and walking. I cook. I read a lot. I have a small number of really close friends, and I love my cats. Amazing. So what do you like to cook? I think my favorite thing is I like to have friends over and sit them down in my living room and give them 20 course toughest dinners. Oh, 20 courses. That's impressive. What are the different Italian dishes I am and how long how much patience they have? But I like to cook for my friends and family. I'm impressed. I think the most courses I've ever managed to put together is like three, maybe three and a half if you count cookies after. Well, the good thing about tap is if one doesn't come out, you can always compensate with the next one. Absolutely. Well, I love it. And you mentioned that you are an avid reader as well, and we love talking about books on our show. So Karen, do you have a favorite book that you can recommend for me and our listeners today? Oh, no. I couldn't even pick a favorite. I love reading books written by lots of authors from all around the world. And I try to read authors from the countries that I'm going to visit. So I've read a lot of Brazilian authors and I've read a lot of authors from European countries and Asian countries. I think it's really interesting to read literature through the voices of people from those countries. Well, it's wonderful to hear more about life outside of science, Karen, but I'd love to talk about your work next as well, because you are doing some phenomenal research there. So how do you describe your work to people who maybe aren't familiar with your field? So I would be described as a primate behaviorally-colletist. I'm a biological anthropologist by training. Biological anthropology sounds like a lot of biology and a lot of anthropology. And it's really about trying to understand the biological basis of humans, human evolution, human behavior, human adaptation. And my specific area in that is in primatology. So humans are primates. There are closest living relatives. And I got interested in understanding them because I'm curious about humans and trying to understand the evolution, where do our social behaviors and our social patterns come from? And one way of exploring that question is to study our closest living relatives to understand what kinds of behavior patterns we share with them. And maybe what kinds of behavior patterns are different. So over the course of that initial interest in understanding the continuities and discontinuities between human and non-human primate behavior, I got involved in studying primates in their natural habitat. For the past 36 years, I've been working in a small forest fragment in southeastern Brazil with one of the most critically endangered primates in the world called the Northern Morkey. And these monkeys turned out to be tremendously different kinds of animals than anyone could have anticipated. And there's continuously new discoveries coming from them that are helping us understand more about the range of behavioral options that primates can exhibit. Certainly. And I think being curious, being able to answer some of these big questions like why humans are the way we are can be really motivating. But I love talking to scientists to understand if they have particular favorite quotes or sayings or forces, maybe outside of this big question kind of thinking that really motivate and inspire them. So do you have any favorites of your own? I guess I think now that the most important thing in life is to love what you do and do what you love. And I have no idea who said that first, but I think it's maybe like some clothing product or something. I don't know. I just think it's just so important to find something to spend your time doing something you really enjoy. And if for whatever reason you can't do that with your work, then it's really important to make time in your life for things that you really enjoy. I was lucky. I always joke that I must have done something really good in my last life because this life, I had the good karma to be able to do what I do to study these marikes. I was so lucky to get this opportunity. Certainly. Well, it sounds like you are so passionate about the work that you do. And I'd love to hear a little bit next about some of the people who might have motivated you or inspired you on your journey to getting to this place where you're able to do the work that you love. So do you have any role models or inspirational figures that have really had a big impact, Karen? I would say that it's sort of at every stage in my life. I've just been so lucky. I had some amazing teachers in elementary school who caught me interested in science and that continued through high school and my college professors were great. My PhD advisor was really supportive and helpful. My parents, of course. So I don't have one particular person who was like a role model that I wanted to be that person. I think what's worked for me was to find the traits in people and the way they respond to things in their views of the world that resonated with me and I put them all together in the sort of composite. And that's what my role is. That's the kind of person I've tried to be. Excellent. I think you have so many wonderful opportunities to work with great people along the career path as a scientist, starting all the way back in elementary school. I know I had some phenomenal teachers as well that I still try and pull inspiration from. Maybe because I'm a professor, but I think teachers often don't get quite as recognized as they could. Certainly. So you mentioned this kind of early interest in science, maybe starting in elementary school. Do you have some early memories that you could share with us? When you first started thinking about science, are you excited about it? Well, one of the things that just popped into my mind when you said that is I remember in third grade learning about the solar system. I just love that. And I don't know. There was just something about being able to order the world in some way and look up in the sky and imagine the worlds that exist beyond our own. It's kind of funny because I ended up going into biology, which is working in a tropical rainforest, which for many people would feel like another planet, a different world, entirely different than our own. I love it. So then what took you from this curious kid, starting to get excited about science in the solar system to where you are today? What are some of these key moments along your path that really helped you get there? So I think that it was kind of a compliment. I mean, I could think about it with some key like landmark memories. One being just as I grew up, I was a suburban kid and I made some friends that helped get me into nature. My family, whenever people that went camping or anything. So I got into nature through friends and then ultimately through clubs and outings and things like that. And I just discovered that it feels so good when I'm outside, when I can't go outside for a long time. Like, I think when I'm sick, cold weather or something, I don't feel as healthy as I normally do. I love being outside. And then I would say that in high school biology, I loved anatomy. Again, just the sense of being able to make sense out of worlds you can't see. So even just imagining where all the body parts inside an animal are, I thought that was really cool because they all fit. And so let's take this for granted. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, just understanding how things work and where they occur. Then in college, I was interested in animal behavior all along. And I worked for a physiological psychologist that I had in my freshman year at Swarthmore College. And his name was Alan Schneider and he hired me as a freshman to work in his lab. And this was really instrumental for me because we were doing research about memory and trying to figure out whether our study subjects were rats. And the questions we were asking with them were whether when people have memory loss, is it because you lose the memory entirely like it's no longer in your brain or is it there but you just can't access it. It's a retrieval process. And I was again, I was so fascinated by the fact that you could ask a question and then it was almost like the creativity of the science to try to figure out how you can answer that. And with the rats, we were manipulating different features of the experiments to try to answer that question. And I love the process. I mean, it's very much like cooking anyway. There's a creative element where you sort of try to answer a question in the case of cooking or trying to answer the question of, you know, is this going to come out right? Well, this tastes good. Yeah. And the way I wanted to do this and in the question of science, it's also there's a lot of creativity that goes into how you think about setting up your question and going about answering it. And I just really liked it. And he was such a great professor because we talked about these things all the time. And the idea that it could even be a sort of a social thing that you could talk to people and get feedback and change ideas around. So I would sort of mark that as the trajectory of, for my interest in science and then, but I did in college get tired about not wanting to keep working in a laboratory with animals that were living in unnatural habitats for them. And that coincided with me taking some anthropology classes again, taught by a fantastic professor Steve Piker. He was a psychological anthropologist, so completely different from the kind of anthropology that I currently do. But it got me thinking about people in their natural environments. And then I thought, well, I can't we study animals in their natural environments. So my junior year of college, this was pre-internet days, pre-computer days. I am typed using white out if anyone remembers what that is. About 40 letters to different people whose contacts I found by going to the library and reading articles, most of them, because I had never been out of the US before, maybe to Canada right across the border in Niagara Falls or something. But I never otherwise traveled. So they were mostly domestic, North American projects. And I was writing a paper for a class on brown bears and black bears. So I wrote all these researchers, most of them worked at national parks and some of them were at other universities about the possibility of working on their field projects. But one of the people happened to be a program officer at the National Science Foundation in charge of the program and animal behavior. And he called me on the phone and he said, Karen, I just I didn't know who he was. I didn't realize then how unusual it was for someone out of the blue to write a program officer at the National Science Foundation or how extraordinary it was that he took the time to call me. I mean, I answered the phone in my dormitory. This was when we had hall fun to take his call to find out. He said, we just funded three projects. I'll give you their contacts. So he gave me their contacts. And one of them was a professor at Cornell University who's unfortunately deceased now that his name was Glen House Fowder. He had just been funded on a study of wild baboons in Kenya and Amazon National Park. So I contacted these three people. And at the end of this whole process, I had three invitations to join field studies, including to spend six months in Kenya as a field assistant on the Embassy Laban project. That is amazing. And my parents were like, you're not going to Kenya. It was a good experience for you to interview for that, but you're not going. I was able to persuade them. So over the winter between my fall and spring semesters of my junior year in college, I got on a plane and went to Kenya with a graduate student who I just met during an interview at Cornell who was going to do his PhD research and I was going to be the field assistant. And that was an experience again that changed my life. When I got to Kenya, I met Jean Altman, who is the main PI, one of the founders she and her husband founded this project, the Embassy Laban project, which I didn't realize at the time was and still is one of the pioneering field studies in primary behavioral ecology. And it's still in existence. But that was in 1979. I spent six months on that project. I learned about baboons and learned about baboon behavior. And I learned that I love this combination. And I can still remember I talk about this in my lectures to the students sometimes. This moment sitting on the savanna, taking notes on a baboons, who were sitting right in front of me because they were already habituated, just thinking that this was that moment where all the things I love in life, being outside, watching animals, doing science, came into this perfect alignment. I knew that work, but I wanted to do. So when I got back from that experience, I still had to graduate from college and I did that. And I was applying to different field projects, including some of the other projects to study bears in North America again that had looked like they might have openings previously. I hadn't yet made a commitment to primates. But I applied for graduate school as kind of my backup plan B, if nothing worked out. And at first, it looked like I was going to get an opportunity to study brown bears. In the Northwest Territory of Canada. And that project then fell through and didn't happen the funding for it. The PI had contacted me and he said, oh, I'm really sorry, it's not going to work out. So the next thing on my list was graduate school and I had already applied and I had some opportunities and I went up to visit Harvard partly because my roommate was going up to see her sister and we had a place to stay. So it was convenient. And I really liked my advisor. It was really exciting. And I thought that was what I was going to do. So I ended up going to graduate school and I wasn't sure what I was going to end up studying, but it would clearly be primates. And then my second year of graduate school, my PhD advisor had been asked by his former student to narrate a film that had been made. His former student's name was Russ Middermire who is a big name in conservation. He was a former vice president of the World Wildlife Fund. And then the president of conservation international and now he's senior scientist or director of the global wildlife conservation. And he at World Wildlife had made a film on the Marquis and he asked his former PhD advisor who was then 10 years later, my advisor or door to narrate it. And my advisor knew I was trying to think of a PhD project and I was looking for primates that hadn't really been studied before to test what were current models of primary behavior at the time in the early 1980s. And I saw these animals and I thought these are really interesting animals. No one really knew much about them except that they were really endangered. And I liked the idea of doing science for a bigger cause. So I was able to go to Brazil in the summer of 1982 with Russ Middermire. He took me to the field site with some other people who were also visiting and another undergraduate who had made the film. And I stayed there for a couple of months, fell in love with the Marquis and I just knew that I was going to come back and study Marquis. So I did a year later and that was the beginning of what's turned into a 36 year long project. Oh, wonderful. Karen, it's been great to hear your story and I think you've lined things up well if graduate school at Harvard is a backup plan. Well, at the time it didn't seem strange but I do really think that's another tip I think that helps me, it just makes me calmer to know that I always have a plan B because you never know what's going to happen and sometimes plan B turns out to be better than planning. I love it. Well, it's been wonderful to hear more about how you get to where you are today and I understand you were doing some amazing work there with the Marquis project. So can you tell us what are you working on right now that you are just so excited about? So the thing about Marquis is that they are really different from other primates, different from what we expected them to be like. First of all, the largest new world primates they are living is complex, multi male, multi female groups. They are arboreal, they live in trees, they travel around by suspensory locomotion, they have these big prehand style tails that they use to swing as pendulum and sometimes they hang down by them. But what makes them scientifically fascinating and still fascinating after all these years is that they live in a completely peaceful egalitarian society. So unlike almost all other primates in Marquis, males and females don't have any dominance hierarchies. It's not like there's a pecking order and one male's dominant and one female's dominant and then the male's dominant, the females in Marquis, the males kind of just all socialize with one another and the females all socialize with one another when males and females want to be in the same place, eat the same fruit. There's no consistent pattern about who gets it first. They hug each other instead of fight. They've been called the hippie primates because of this because they're just all lovey devy and they're also actually very promiscuous. So females mate with lots of different males and again something that's a bit different from most other primates is that not only do they have a lot of partners when they're mating but it's very much about female choice. So something that you would rarely find in other species of primates would be a female mating with a male and other males just sitting casually nearby waiting their turn and sometimes the females will mate with other males. I've seen female mate with five males in 11 minutes, successively. Oh wow. And then whenever she's done, she just leaves and the males might keep an eye on her but they don't harass her. There's no bullying. There's no threat. And they don't overtly interfere with each other's mating attempts. So I just love, I mean it was intriguing scientifically because wow, how did they do this? This is such a different model of behavior. And then also it's kind of nice because wouldn't we all like to live in a world that was completely egalitarian and peaceful. So in that sense the Marquis stand out at this model of wow, here's another way of life that is so different from our own and maybe one that we could learn a lot from. But I would say that those scientific questions, kind of the murky pattern of behavior came out really clearly early on and there were lots of reasons to be a little bit suspicious of it because Marquis are really endangered. They only occur in an Atlantic forest of southeastern Brazil, which if you think about the continent of South America on the Atlantic Ocean side, if you kind of envision in your mind of how it goes in and down, so it's where it goes in and down, that's the southeastern Atlantic forest. And of course that's also where São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, some of the biggest cities in the country are. And it's an area that's been heavily farmed and there's lots of coffee plantations and pasture land. So most of the Atlantic forest has been previously disrupted, disturbed, in many cases clear cut in the 19 and early part of the 20th century. And what that's meant is the forest are fragmented, what remains of these forests are fragments and all the primates are really fragmented in small populations and in certain regions there's been heavy hunting pressure. So there were reasons to think that maybe the pattern I was initially seeing was an artifact of animals living in this really disturbed habitat at low population densities. There were only about 23 animals in my study group when I first began and there was a second group in the forest with about the same number. So about 50 animals in this forest of about 2000 acres. Over time though the population has grown. In fact, it's peaked in 2015 at over 350 individuals and the group split. So we had four different groups and even with all of these changes in demography and the habitat regenerating we now have almost a thousand hectare for us and it was a privately owned property that the family converted to become a private nature reserve. So it is protected for perpetuity now. What we've seen is this population expansion, lots of things changing and lots of parts of the MWK's behavior have changed and that plasticity and adaptiveness of their behavioral responses is what keeps me fascinated by them. But the part of their peacefully egalitarian society has been a constant. So now we have not only long-term data from my long-term field site but also comparative data from other sites that my students and colleagues have also began to study in the MWK's and other places and it's a characteristic that we've seen everywhere. So we can I think confidently say that the northern MWK's have figured out how to live and peacefully egalitarian societies and with great success because despite all the odds against them, they're still holding on. Well this is absolutely fascinating Karen and talking about this project you sort of hinted at some of the challenges that you encounter in studying what is a highly endangered species. So can you talk a little bit more about some of the challenges that you faced whether they were just difficult situations that you found yourself in or maybe major failures that you've had in your career and give me and our listeners a sense of how you work through these tough times? Well, we try to forget the hard times and concentrate more on the good times. So the hard times whenever you're living through them they seem like the worst times and then you get over them and things go on and you survive and the monkey's surviving and you feel like it wasn't so bad until the next hard time. What's been really challenging is that this is a small population of monkeys living at a protected reserve and I need to give the name of this reserve and tell you a little bit about that story too because it's really cool. This is a privately-owned forest. The owner of the forest is senior Feliciano Miguel Abdullah. He's a Lebanese ancestry. His family came to Brazil when he was a kid and he ended up buying this big coffee farm and it's a fazinda they're called in Brazil and it had a patch of forest in it and he protected the forest. Unlike almost everyone else in the region who cut their forests, he protected the forest and he prevented the people who worked in the region from hunting the primates. And as a result, this one person created a sanctuary and I think it's a really important lesson because it shows what a difference one person can make. And this one man decided to save his forest when he died in 2000, his family instead of cutting it up and dividing it between them. They decided to save the forest and turn it into a protected reserve. And today it's named in his honor Feliciano Miguel Abdullah in the township of Caratinga and Minascheris and it is the sanctuary. It's the site of one of the largest populations of this critically endangered species in the world and in fact about one third of all the northern Marquis in the world live in this one forest. And that realization, the idea that this little patch of forest which when you look at it on Google Maps is really scary because you see it's this patch of forest surrounded by non-forests. You realize how fragile it is and that it really became a sense that it's not just about science and we're going to learn everything we can about these monkeys because a lot of the information that we have learned has become really valuable for conservation efforts here and other places. But it's also that we have to do everything we can to protect this forest and these animals. So getting the forest to be protected was a really important progress which was thanks to the family that owned it. And now as a protected reserve we're continuing to try to develop the activities so that we can continue the research and protect the animals but still generate some support for the reserve through ecotourism and other activities that have low impact on the animals or on the region but actually could be beneficial to the region. So we can protect the forest. There's no clear cutting, no selective logging anymore. There's no hunting but then in 2014 and 2015 there were two years of drought and this was a major drought in South Eastern Brazil. Major cities like San Paulo were having water rationing and there were power shortages because the hydroelectric dam didn't have enough power because of this extended drought. We had two forest fires during that time and that was really scary because we realized that there were limits to what we could do to prevent things like that. And then in 2016 we had a nice rainfall and thought this is going to be great, it's going to restore things but with the rain came a lot of mosquitoes and one of the worst outbreaks of yellow fever in this region and humans can be vaccinated against it but even so not all the people were vaccinated so there were hundreds of people who died during this yellow fever outbreak. Oh dear. But in addition to that, primates are really vulnerable and especially some other species of primates that also live in our forest, brown-houndler monkeys and buffy-headed marmosets. So in our forest and in other forests in this region we saw a complete devastation, this major loss of life in primates and the sense of going back to this forest which had always been this refugee dept or the long trip to get there and then you get to this forest and there are so much life and energy and visiting the forest right in the middle of the yellow fever outbreak was just heartbreaking. There used to be so many howler monkeys howling and you could just hear the life in the forest it was silent and it took us a long time to relocate the marikes and many marikes died during that time we lost 10% of our population during that period. We're not 100% they died of yellow fever because we were never able to recover any biological material that would allow us to test it but it was awfully it was the first time we saw this kind of loss and I have to say it didn't ever make me think that I would stop the work not once it just re-ignited all my energy and motivation that oh my gosh we can never really relax our vigilance and you think everything's good and the populations doing great and then you have these natural events like the drought and then disease and suddenly it's kind of a scientific gift because there are also new questions we can study as the population starts to recover and we can look at the different interactions between the different species because the marikes just lost a lot of their major food the howler monkeys eat a lot of the same foods that the marikes do and now that population of the howler monkeys are much more vulnerable than the marikes are to the yellow fever and we lost many more howler monkeys probably 90% of that population so now the forest is wide open for the marikes in a way and maybe this will help their populations recover but a million different new questions I feel in a way like I'm a 20-year-old starting out with lots of great questions and opportunities but it's the kind of research opportunity that you would never want to have happen because it happened as on the heels of ecological disaster and the health disaster that negatively impacted a lot of people as well so it was a good warning sign not what we had achieved in a way was by helping through conservation efforts and our research presence of accumulating and building up a larger population in some way in conservation biology there's a theory that of course the larger the population is the better it can withstand these kinds of catastrophic population declines and the marikes are like a perfect example of that because the population had gotten big enough that even losing 10% didn't wipe it out and now we're seeing lots of babies and the population is growing again so we lost a little bit of ground but I think we're going to recover and I'm still optimistic but these are really hard things when you want something happened so quickly at that scale and there's nothing you can do about it we couldn't vaccinate these animals we couldn't catch them all we couldn't move them anywhere translating them moving to the someplace it might be something that we might want to do with different animals in the future but it's not that there was necessarily a better place to move them at this time in nor is it a simple process so I think really it was a sense of just realizing that because the population had gotten so big it grown so well had been so successful in its recovery over the past 30 years that it could sustain these successive catastrophes of the drought followed by the disease certainly and Karen I really appreciate that rather than in this situation sinking into despair you really looked at the positive notes looked at the silver lining and it reinforced to resolve to continue doubling down on your efforts to not give up on this project I think that's so important but I also have to say that I've also been really lucky to have met early on in Brazil my first visit there really and ever since Brazilian colleagues and I have a team of students and former students and people who are now colleagues who were students as well as long-term colleagues including social descendant is who was living in the research house when I was doing my dissertation research in 1983 and 1984 he was there studying the Howler Monkeys at the time and then he subsequently started a Mourink project in his home state of spirit centers and he's been collaborating with me in caretling ever since the late 90s again so he's just his long-term dedicated colleagues and students and former students so we have this big research team and we're all concerned about conservation and the Mourinkies and the primates and the habitat and science is not a solitary endeavor and conservation cannot be a solitary endeavor you really need to work with other people and I'm really lucky that this Brazilian scientist and conservationists have welcomed me and let me participate in some cases lead some of these efforts it's just a really important opportunity and it meant that when you have people to share in the good times and celebrate the successes of the populations growth and when we see good things happening and also people to share in the hard times and when we were having trouble back in January 2017 it was after the current team up to students had just come back from their winter breaks and it was the peak of the yellow fever outbreak and we got to the forest and we couldn't find any Howler Monkeys these to be everywhere and now suddenly it was silent and we couldn't find the Mourinkies and I was able to call in some former students basically former students from all over Bruego or contact Amy volunteering to come with their own expense to help us try to find all the Mourinkies so we could get really good data and at the end of about a month and a half we were able to figure out that we had only lost 10% it was so important and then they had to scatter it I don't know whether they were noticing that suddenly there were no more Howler monkeys and or the Howler monkeys that used to eat all their food and forced them to travel further were gone or whether they were celebrating the return of the rings abundance of food yeah we don't know what was going on but it was just scary that sense of dude we just lose our animals has all of this just gone but it didn't happen the monkeys are still there and the Mourinkies are doing well and the Howlers one of my former students in long-term collaborator Carla Pasa May we have projects studying the other primates and they're coming back as well wonderful I think finding and building this scientific community that's willing to drop everything and come help is definitely a big success in and of itself but I'd love to talk about some of your wins Karen I think and science success can be rare so we have to take these moments to celebrate success when it happens so do you have a favorite story that you can share with us of something great that happened well I think when I started putting the demographic data together and started realizing that this population was growing and we were really you know learning how big the population had become and that there were more babies and the animals were starting to splitting up into more groups I think that felt like a huge success as well but that was a process that it happens you've got the population's growing but you have to sort of sit down and look at the data and when I said down and I realized how solid the population was becoming that was probably in the late 90s I was pretty excited about that that was like whoa this has been tacit there's real hope here but also I think in the course of all these changes the merkeys have just amazed me one of the things they've started doing as the population got so big because I've only told the good side of it but of course they're living in this isolated forest fragment and they actually started showing signs that they might have been experiencing the crowding that comes with lots of animals in the same relatively small space they started coming down to the ground and again I thought that was a really exciting discovery that way we were able to document early on in the process of a new behavioral tradition that these animals whose bodies are completely built for living in the trees are now walking around on the ground and eating on the ground and they discovered this whole new range of foods that you can only find on the ground or close to the ground and that gets us again it just gives me hope because it thinks like well if we can just keep protecting them they're going to figure out ways to survive and I love the idea that they can do that some other scientific milestones were when we were able to using completely non-invasive methods collecting murky dung sounds like fun we were able to crack the code of their whole reproductive biology really non-invasively it still gives me goosebumps to think about this because I just think it's such a great success and I did this work in collaboration with a colleague of mine it was constant if the Wisconsin primate center Tony Ziegler she visited me in Brazil in the late 80s and she was just asking simple questions about what she was interested in primate reproduction asking me about what the reproductive life was like and at that time we only had information about behavioral basically what we could see so I could document every time they copulated when any time they made it I could mark the last time they were seeing mating they might meet when we don't see them and then I could document the first time I see them with a baby but that was sort of what it was limited to well she said I bet we could figure out a way to get it this all I don't want to catch them I don't want to do anything invasive they're critically endangered and I didn't want to do anything that would interfere with them so we developed this project that basically involved collecting their dung their poop and then we could extract the steroids the hormones like estrogens and progesterones and other steroids as well and use those to map their reproductive cycles and it was incredibly intensive research I did the pilot study which meant basically following a few females we can recognize them all individually from their facial markings and every time they pooped once a day I would collect their dung then we would extract from the dung their steroids and map it out and we could see when females were experienced ovarian cycles and the timing of the cycles relative to when they were mating and then when those cycles stopped which was indicative of them becoming pregnant and then with enough samples enough different females we could figure out between when those cycles stopped in steroid levels never returned to baseline levels and then when their babies were born figure out things like gestation link so our information about gestation length in this species is critically endangered species of primates comes from a non-invasive hands of observational studies of wild primates I think that's okay and by the way gestation length is 7.2 months wonderful and we learned many more things about steroids as a result of these studies that we did over many years and a lot of Brazilian students on the project participated not only in the collection of the fecal samples but also in the extractions that we were doing in the forest they was really challenging to bring that material back travel with it back in the beginning I would bring it back is just like dung suspended in ethanol and then after 9.11 airlines didn't want to carry anything that would be flammable so we were doing all the extractions in the field that was a lot of work my fingers would get exhausted because it basically meant pulling the steroids out and then transferring them to these little filters that are in what are called solid his extraction cartridges and bringing those back and then dealing with customs in the US because when it looked like poop it was almost easier to get it through right you can explain what this is yeah but it looks like white powder it's a lot more challenging but we had all the permits and everything like that but I just thought that was such an amazing study it took a long time to do but I'm so proud of the fact that we did this without again in a completely non-invasive way and we were able to validate some of these questions using fecal steroids as opposed to urine using some animals that had been in captivity at the Rio de Janeiro primate center from other sites but it was really came out of the field work that was all this information that was really exciting and then also the merke genetic work which was done in collaboration with Tony D. Fury who's at the University of Texas and to Brazilian geneticists and a graduate student and his Brazilian genetic advisor and this was really cool because not only were we able to confirm what we saw in the behavior that if you want to know what the outcome of populations are you see babies and you always pretty much know who the mother is but you don't always know who the father is there's no way to know especially if a female has made it with lots of different males as is true and merkees so the paternity data that we obtained again just from collecting poop from the done if this case extracting the DNA and this was done again in Tony D. Fury's lab all the tonies in my life this is kind of crazy but we were able to show through that study that what we saw was actually what was happening that there was very low reproductive skew lots of males a sigh of babies and we don't know if they know that they're the fathers are not the males are nice to everybody so they're nice to each other's babies as well but that was really cool and then we saw this really intriguing pattern which I'm not sure if it's gonna hold up over time or not that it looks like it has and that is that the males have this really low reproductive skew lots of males I think it was like 22 babies were sired by 13 different males something like that was really lots of fathers but the mothers of those fathers of the sons so the grandmothers of the babies they have concentrated they have more reproductive skew so there were only four grandmothers who responsible for 75% of these babies so that was a really kind of interesting question to me because it's tended out and we look at reproductive success in animals and whose having babies in animals that live as long as Marikis into their 40s we're just we are just discovering now as the study goes on long enough we can say that it's not surprising that you might see multi-generational effects on reproductive success and that's something that because primates are so in generally long live it's something that maybe hasn't been a question that was accessible in the wild until pretty recently as long-term studies like the Marikis study have begun to show so that's a really exciting direction to go as well and like I say all of these things diet how the range of foods as they move into new niches like the ground or reproductive parameters or genetics are also all of the things you need to know if you're going to develop a conservation management plan for critically endangered species so it's really exciting to go from science which has all these really fascinating theoretical questions about animal behavior and evolution and ecology and about the implications for human behavior patterns and then to also say everything that we're learning can also be used to as help save these animals absolutely well congratulations Karen on all of these wonderful successes I love that you've been able to point at some of the cool places you've been able to travel in this discussion of the work that you've been doing and I think this opportunity to travel is relatively unique to careers in science and maybe particularly for some of the fieldwork that you're doing so Karen do you have a favorite place that your science has taken you? I love Brazil everywhere I've visited in Brazil has been fantastic and I haven't seen a lot of places when I was younger I used to try to save time at the end of my summer trips to go up the coast of Brazil and I have visited most of the beaches I don't do this anymore but when I was younger I'll just wear my bathing suit underneath my clothes whenever I travel because you never knew when you could go swimming it was important to be adapted you can be ready for anything right? You want to be able to go into the ocean if you can but there is a really special place in Brazil that my work led me to visit it's called the Ibitipaka reserve and it's in the southwestern part of the state of miniseries and it's a really special place that is owned by a Brazilian businessman and he decided to make a major commitment to conservation he's reinforced and he's fine up the farmland in the area making concentrated reforestation efforts he financed and built a pusada for tourists that he has turned over to the local people to run he basically voted the cost in the beginning and once his expenses were compensated there was a payback plans and the local people are benefiting I mean he's putting resources back into the community and I met him indirectly because of the monarchies because one of the parcels of forest that he owned had a very small population of monarchies and he knew about this years ago more than 10-15 years ago and had actually contacted us my colleagues went to visit and they counted the monarchies and then over time a small isolated population began to start losing animals and monarchies the females are the dispersing ones so the males stay in their natal groups for life and the females leave if the females leave and there are no new females coming in then the population ultimately will go extinct because there's no one to reproduce this is why females are the most important well they need one man but you need lots of females so he was committed and really pushed me and my Brazilian colleagues who work in conservation and especially are concerned with the monarchies to do something about this and he was offering to support any efforts we could think of when we finally were able to organize a meeting there with the group that is the Brazilian national action plan for the conservation of monarchies he only had four males left in his population and now there are only two males left and he's been so devoted to helping us providing resources and really calling us making people keep it on their radar so my Brazilian colleagues have been amazing about this and they translocated they brought an isolated female who was leaving all by herself because in other populations you got females leaving these small places and they're looking for new groups but if there are no new groups nearby then they need help so they were able to capture her and bring her to this population and for some reason or another she didn't like the males and anyway didn't work out I didn't work out the way it had planned but now they're involved in a big project that's going to ultimately I think have great success to make sure that we don't lose these animals and this place ibi-chipaka is magical and I think it's another example of how one person with vision who just decided that he was going to make a commitment to conservation in the case of senior Feliciano at my long term field site in Caratinga the vision was to protect it and keep it there and open it up to me he let me come and build my research project there in the case of ibi-chipaka it was to protect land and try to expand it and involve the local people in in conservation efforts and ecotourism that could help sustain the protection of these areas and make conservation part of it but that's what that was a fantastic place one of my favorite places it sounds absolutely wonderful and i love that you've touched on a couple times now some of the amazing people you've been able to work with because i think that is so important to highlight in science that we're not what the media often portrays us in films or in articles and things like that we're not these crazy-haired eyeglass wearing white lab-coded robots working by ourselves in a laboratory where dynamic multi-dimensional people who often don't fit those stereotypes that's really true and actually sometimes i keep talks for girls and women and science groups i show a picture of my forest and this is my laboratory right and we have cool boots that we wear i think it really does undermine that stereotypic image of scientists is just being boring or the people i love that so i have to ask do you have any fun field traditions that your group does are just kind of quirky or funny memories that you guys have shared? well i mentioned earlier i was talking about the reproductive project that we call it the fecal steroid the hormone studies i just remember cracking up one time it was in Brazil i was sitting around at a table at a restaurant with several of my students and old former students and new students and my students at the other end of the table we're talking about the composition of the done and which of the females were easiest to collect and they were describing the whole defecation pattern of some of the females and this one holds it in and this one provides a sample and this whole conversation about done the bathroom habits of the primeits we were joking that afterward about how strange it would sound to neighboring tables and yet here we were describing by their name oh Nancy oh Louise you know she's easy she's hard she holds it in she's braised it out these sort of bizarre things and it's not like we're weird people everyone was worried about making sure that we had the best samples possible to do this really cool scientific research non-invasively on these endangered animals and yeah it was a frequent occurrence during the years of that project where this is the stomach of the patterns of providing done samples from them wild animals were what made such a conversation that it was a really inside joke because people who were it didn't know what we were talking about but we were totally weird i should add to that working with merikie dung is actually not so unpleasant because they eat a lot of leaves from the cinnamon family so it's really aromatic like it smells kind of like spicy popery or something and it's sort of an attractive smell and they're vegetarian so their poop is kind of nice smelling that makes it maybe a little weirder i don't know well considering the amount of scientific information we've been able to get from it without ever touching the animals and i really think that that compensates for a lot to you without any interference with them absolutely well Karen it's been wonderful to hear about some of the fun and funny things that happen in your group and i think you're absolutely right here sometimes you do have to take a step back and sort of think about things out of context and how they might sound other people but we've talked about some of the phenomenal work that your group has been doing and i know there are a ton of challenges that often stand in the way of you being able to answer your dream questions or solve the problems that you're working on so if we gave you all of the resources you could dream about today Karen what is the one problem you most want to solve? well if it was a question of resources i would put it all into saving the merikie this is a problem we know where they all live we know the unique situations about each of these field sites this is a conservation problem that we can solve and it's really just a question we even have the people to do it because lots of people have been involved in those projects who could work on it so i would get together with all my Brazilian colleagues and other experts we would sit down with the merikie action plan that we published about eight years ago go through it and see what we still need to do and it might involve moving some animals around and it might involve buying up some land and it might involve hiring some guards for some places just two or three salaries that would help the local people would be all that would take to protect those animals so that's what i would do it would be conservation now there are scientific questions i would answer but they're not so much financially dependent as logistically dependent well Karen wonderful to hear about kind of what this dream problem is that you'd love to solve and i think in having this conversation we've learned a lot about your career path and as a scientist there are a lot of people who are there along the way for you to give you advice and to guide you on your journey and i'd love for you to provide some guidance for our listeners today so do you have one piece of advice that you received at some point that really helped you that you can pass on to our listeners i have two really one of them which was from my PhD advisor or to four was to surround yourself with people who are smarter than you are and i always think about that you always want to be challenged you always want to be learning from other people realizing that you can learn and learning is a lifelong process and other people have a lot to teach you so that's one thing and the other eyes would say would be something that my father used to say work hard but have fun i love it when work becomes not fun for any state of period of time it's time to change what you're doing but fun without work wouldn't work for me well wonderful advice to give our listeners is there any last message you'd like to leave them with at the end of our conversation today Karen finding something you love that keeps you centered that reminds you what your values are and they just kind of connects to who you are and that you're passionate about that you care about and that's bigger than yourself i think that is what will keep you going wonderful message to share with our listeners now Karen if they want to learn more about you and the wonderful work that you do where should they go or what's the best place to learn more probably the best way to start is to strider lab and that should take you to my lab site at the university was constant in medicine and from there you find my email you can find out some of the projects that i am my students are working on and you can find the facebook page to the murky project and from that to the field site excellent well listeners definitely check out the website learn more about the amazing work Karen is doing and Karen thank you so much for being generous with your time today in sharing a piece of your story on our show well thank you so much for this chance you can tell i love what i do and i love to talk about it i think it's really neat and i hope that this is help stimulate some people to get interested in primary behavior and conservation absolutely well thank you again Karen and listeners thank you for being here as well we'll see you next time on another episode of people behind the science