 Hi everyone and welcome to People Behind the Science. I'm Dr. Marie McNally and I appreciate you joining me today for episode 787 with our guest Dr. Catherine Amelie Carr. If you like this episode and you want to check out more stories from amazing people doing great science today, listeners you can find more episodes of our show on Apple podcasts, Spotify or wherever else you like to listen. And today, Catherine has some excellent stories to share with all of us. So get ready to meet another one of our remarkable people behind the science. Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNally is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to The People Behind the Science Podcast. Today I'm excited to be speaking with our guest scientist Dr. Catherine Amelie Carr. So Catherine, welcome to our show today. How are you? Oh, I'm happy to be here. Well, we are so happy to have you with us and I'm looking forward to learning more about you and the work that you do. But first, let me tell our listeners a little bit more about your background and how you got to where you are today. So listeners, Catherine is a distinguished university professor and the department of biology at the University of Maryland College Park. She received her undergraduate training in zoology with first-class honors at the University of Cape Town and she completed her master's degree in biology at the State University, New York at Buffalo. She was awarded her PhD in neuroscience at the University of California, San Diego and afterwards, Catherine conducted post-doctor research at Caltech and she served briefly on the faculty at the University of Rochester before joining the faculty at the University of Maryland in 1990. Now, Catherine has served as a course director and co-founder at the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole and she's also served as president, director and trustee for the Glass Foundation. Catherine has received numerous awards and honors over the years, including an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship and she was awarded the Humboldt Senior Research Prize twice. She's also a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the Hans-Wisenshoffs College and the International Society for Neuroethology. She received an honorary doctorate degree from the University of Southern Denmark and she was named Mentor of the Year and the Neuroscience and Cognitive Science Program at the University of Maryland. And today, Catherine, we're excited to get to know you as a scientist and researcher, of course, but also as a person. So can you tell us all what do you like to do when you're not doing science? Lately, I have been doing a lot of volunteer work for the State Park System, pulling out invasive species and interestingly enough, I've found many of my friends who have moved into retirement have been doing the same thing. So it seems like biologists often like to spend just much time as they can outside and I read a lot. I love that. So what kind of invasive species are you finding in the parks there? Well, we're on the test peak base. So major invasive issues are fragmites which are too much for me to tackle and that's the marsh read. And then I mostly pull out English ivy which is a dreadful strangler and Japanese honey circle. Those are our two big things in our local parks and they're quite easy to get rid of. I think if people put their back into it, we could do a lot of good starting with parks and then just moving through neighborhoods. Well, it's wonderful to hear more about your life outside of science, but I'd love to talk about the work you do in science as well. So how do you describe your research Catherine just someone who's not in your specific research area or perhaps outside of science altogether? I'm sort of interested in how animals perceive their environment. So I've worked on a lot of different animals from fish to birds and to the current work on reptiles because we see the world through our own senses, but very often if you look at how animals around us perceive the world, they're sharing and seeing things that we're not necessarily that sensitive to. You should start by watching animals, that's sort of the essence of animal behavior. And then trying to think of ways to understand what it is that animals perceive. So work on geckos has largely been motivated by trying to understand if lizards can hear sound and how they respond to it. And we've done a lot of behavioral work in the field working on different geckos trying to understand how they use the sounds that they perceive and produce. I think that is fascinating and I love kind of bringing it back to the idea of just sort of observing the natural world, observing animals as they're interacting with their environments. And I look forward to chatting more about your work as we go through our conversation today, but I think as a scientist, it can be helpful to have little bits of motivation and inspiration to get you through some of the difficult times. So do you have a favorite quote or a saying or just something that really motivates and inspires you, Catherine? Well, there are a couple, a very good scientist stand out who worked on bats years ago. We're studying a problem and trying to describe it to students and eventually looked up and he said, not so simple. And I carry that with me because our brains and our behavior are not that simple. It takes a lot of sorts and careful observations and careful experiments to try and understand what it is that animals can perceive. I think that is a wonderful sort of encapsulation of science as a whole. I think oftentimes things that appear simple on the surface are quite a bit more complex. This was the famous Nabooa Suga from Washington University, it's St. Louis. I should attribute that quote, even though I'm not sure if he'd like to have it tagged him, one of his students told me. Well, I think that is wonderful. And I'd love to talk about some of your role models and mentors along your scientific career journey. I think these people can also be a great source of inspiration. So, Catherine, when you look at your own life and career, are there particular people who really helped you get to where you are today or who you looked up to? There are a few things I'd like to talk about more than the people who've helped me because you learn so much from your mentors and from your colleagues. I was an undergraduate at the University of Cape Town. And while I was there, I was lucky enough to work with two people, a marine ecologist called George Branch, who taught me so much about the Rocky Shore, which is so diverse in southern Africa, so many different plant animal interactions. But then, principally, I'd also like to talk about my senior mentor when I was an undergraduate. A scientist called Jennifer Jarvis, who's famous for having first discovered that the naked mole rats show the same kind of social behaviors when sees among the bees and wasps, where you have a single female queen who suppresses reproduction in all the other animals in the colony. It was just a series of amazing observations from, again, of very careful scientists who looked with attention, but how the animals in her colony interacted. So it was a very lucky undergraduate to work with these outstanding scientists. And then I went to graduate school at the University of California in San Diego, where again, it was just good fortunate. I was looking for a good mentor. I was very lucky to work with somebody called Walter Halliganberg. Walter very sadly is no longer with us. He was killed in a plane crash outside Pittsburgh decades ago, but he was the person who worked on weekly electric fish and how they use the electrical signals to communicate. They're both weekly electric fishes in South America and in Africa. And interestingly, they're both independently invented an electric sense that can be used to probe their environment, their nocturnal. They use the electric signal to detect prey objects in other fishes and to communicate in these dark waters. And I learnt so much from Walter, but how you start with careful behavioral observations of what an animal can do and then go on to try and understand what it is about their nervous system that lets them in this case detect electrical signals. So my career has been largely marked by good fortune in the people that I've been able to work with or that I've interacted with. My most doctor on mentor was a person called Masakazu Kineshi, he's a professor at Caltech. And he and I worked together on carrying in barnals and his behavioral insights were just astounding with all finding stemming from careful behavioral observations where you ask the animal what it can see and do. And then I've had a lot of colleagues to work with. The one I wanted to talk about most is a professor at Brandeis called Eve Marda. She received the Presidential Medal of Science, I think last year, but I've learnt you learn a lot from watching people do good work and her insights into how various motor circuits interact to produce behavior. She works on a small lot of the nervous system of lobsters and she showed that small groups of neurons can combine to produce a whole lot of different motor behaviors. And so all these people have, through their very careful insights, shown me a great deal. And also they're all extremely good mentors. They stick in my mind because of their generosity of spirit and sharing their ideas and insights. I think that's wonderful, Catherine. It sounds like you've had some exceptional mentors at different stages of your career. Oh, yeah, I was really, really lucky. Well, let's take it back perhaps to the beginning. You mentioned that already as an undergraduate student you were getting involved in research, perhaps we could rewind back even further. What initially got you interested in pursuing this path in science? When I was very small, maybe five or so, I wanted to drive a train. But after that, sometime within that time period, I decided I wanted to be a biologist. I'd sulk if I wasn't given biology books for Christmas. I used to wonder around the garden looking at insects. I am one of those happy, lucky people too have been able to do the work that they loved almost their whole life. And so I already knew when I went to university that I was going to try and pursue a career in biology. And it was only because of the South African political situation that I came to graduate school in the States. That makes sense. I think it's a big jump from trans to biology, but it sounds like you had your mindset early. And I think that's remarkable. So what were some of these key moments that really helped you get to where you are today? Well, first, it's very important to be able to get research experience because it teaches you that research often involves boring, careful repetition. You often experience failure. And so early exposure to some of the annoying features of science, I think can be helpful. Some of the things that advise your career are discoveries you make with your colleagues and collaborators. And when I was a graduate student in Walter Halliganburg's lab in San Diego, he and I working together were able to show that weekly electric fish were able to detect very small time differences between different parts of their body. Electric fish have electroseptives all over their body. And they're able to pull these groups of electroseptives to tell where other electric fish are or where prey objects might be. And they do this by being very sensitive to these very small timing differences in the electric signal as it reaches different parts of their body. And I worked on their parts of the electric fish brain that detect these time differences, but found it a little bit challenging to determine how exactly the neurons were sensitive to these very small timing differences. And so that led me to the work that I did as a postdoc working on sound localization. And that added a little bit more relevance to our own selves and our hearing because humans and animals on land don't detect electrical signals. But we do detect very small time differences and we use those small time differences for sound localization. So for sound is coming from one side of the body, it reaches one ear before the other. And our brain translates those time differences into location in space. And we as humans are exquisitely sensitive to small time differences between our two ears. Even when your eyes are shut, you can tell generally where sound is coming from. And that's because our brains are doing this computation. And so that focus on detecting time differences, both at the behavioral and the physiological level we leads driven a lot of my research over the last few decades. Certainly, I think these sensory systems particularly sound they're just remarkable to behold and sort of understand how it all works to create the experiences that we have every day. And I'd love to talk more about the work that you're doing in this area. Do you have a project at the moment, Catherine, that you are just the most excited about and want to share with all of us today? If I may, I would like to talk to you about the work on the barking geckos. We have been working on sharing in lizards for quite a while, but we were very interested in trying to understand their behavior and whether lizards could make sense of the auditory world around them. But it was difficult to find the right lizards to study at the level of behavior. You can ask a person if they can tell where sound is. You can put them in a booth, give them headphones, we'll all do very well at saying where sound is. But if you try and ask a lizard where sound is coming from, they're just going to look at you. In fact, it's hard to tell when we look at lizards on our garage wall. It's hard to tell if that lizard can share you, can tell where you are. And we spent a lot of time trying to find the right animal. And then, till I was complaining to one of my colleagues in Cape Town about this scientific problem, hard to find a lizard that could tell us if they could localize sound. And he said, ah, I have the right animal for you, which is the barking gecko. They're found throughout the Calahari and other dry regions of southern Africa. And every spring, male barking geckos dig burrows in the sand of the semi desert region. And the male will sit at the mouth of the burrow at dusk, and then again, a dawn, and they'll call about every 30 seconds. Then they stick their head out of the burrow and they get, in the most enticing way that they can. And if they're successful, they will entice female geckos to come in to the burrow, mate with them, and then lay their eggs in the depths of the burrow, which are cooler and protected from the heat and protected from predators. And then the male will dig out the branches to the burrow and try and entice other females over than a couple of months of spring. And so we thought that we could study these geckos and see if they responded to the sounds of other geckos. So we set up an expedition in 2019 to go and observe geckos in the Calahari. We put together equipment to videotip geckos at low light level, brought microphones with us, and we also brought an apparatus where we can put electrodes on likely and nestedized geckos head and see if they responded to sound. These are the same kind of observations as are often made in hospital rooms to tell if babies can hear. It's more or less exactly the same technique. And many of your listeners may not know, but I think it's a law in most countries that every child that's born in a hospital has to have its hearing tested. This is normally done by putting a little earphone in the ear and recording an auto-acoustic commission, but there's some percentage of babies that fail that initial test and then are tested by having little EEG electrodes put on their scalp. And then they hear a small ping or click from a speaker next to their head. And then these electrodes should pick up a strong evoked response from the brain if the baby can hear. And hearing is tested like this all over the animal kingdom, not only among babies, but among other animals as well. And we use these same techniques where you record this auditory brain stem response to tell if the lizards could hear. So in 2019, off we went, we were able to videotip some geckos sticking their heads out of the boroughs and calling. And when we did this, we could see that the geckos were looking at their neighbors. So all this is pretty exciting. And we were certainly able to record their hearing capabilities using the same baby technique of recording their brain stem response. But unfortunately the video cameras that we took with us were not sensitive enough to be able to record it in full darkness. And so we couldn't really precisely observe the geckos orientations to sound. It looked like they were looking at their neighbors, but we just didn't get enough data. And so we thought, okay, we'll come back next year. But this is where the fact we went to the Calahari in 2019 gets to be important because of COVID. We couldn't go back for the next few years. The reserve is on the border of Botswana and Northern South Africa. And it has a population of graduate students who were working in isolation on their particular projects. And they were very strict about not having visitors into the reserve because there was no vaccine initially. So we had to wait until 2023 to go back and we bought new video cameras with us where we could record in full darkness. And we also brought an array of Bluetooth controlled speakers. And so every night my collaborators, Jacob Christians and Dalsgad from southern Denmark and Michael Cherry from the University of Steldenbars in South Africa, we would go out and we'd try and find a male gecko calling from this barrow mouth. And we'd put an array of speakers around the barrow about a meter away. And then we'd train the video camera on the barrow. And then we would play gecko calls from each speaker and then record the geckos head turn response to these playback calls. And I mean, you asked me about the most exciting project we have that wouldn't be talking about now if it hadn't worked. Even though lizards on your garage wall may just give you the stinkers you walk by, they really are paying a lot of attention to you. They know where you are and they can localize sound almost as well as we can. So that's our current project. Well, I think that is absolutely fascinating. And I imagine going out in the field is not without its own challenges. And I think talking about these challenges is so important. I'm ignoring the tough parts. But it is true that every time we've gone to the desert where it never rains. We have had at least one rain storm and badda experiments washed out. Oh no. But mostly fieldwork requires really, really careful planning because we pick up supplies, you know, a whole days drive away and our equipment has to be working and we have to have backups because equipment fails. In this case, we'll be very fortunate. I would like to also mention that we did this work in a place called the Kuruman River Reserve. And many people will have seen on nature documentaries because the primary work that's taking place there is on the social behavior of meerkats. There's very interesting little mammals where again, they're led by a female meerkat who's sort of the alpha female in this and alpha male. And the meerkats teach the young how to farage. They go out every day and look for the kinds of things that meerkats like to eat. And so that's why the reserve has been established for these very lovely animal behavior experiments on social behavior and meerkats. And they were very hospitable to their weird gecko visitors. Well, I think that's really exciting that you're able to go out to the field to be able to actually see these animals in their own environment. And you touched on some of the challenges that have to do with fieldwork. And I think these struggles, these failures in science are so common. And I think it's so important that people get to hear about them because oftentimes you do only see those sort of success stories or the final product. So do you have an example of a time, Catherine, where you really struggled with something or perhaps you had a major failure that you had to figure out how to work through in science? I would say that probably everything I've done has been marked by some kind of failure. And if you're fortunate, you learn from your mistakes. So with the geckos, I originally thought we were going to be able to have a camera suspended on a pole above a gecko barrow. And the male gecko would call and we would be able to observe female geckos are inting towards the barrow. We couldn't do it. We were lucky to rescue that field season with the initial recordings. We were able to record the gecko calls and we were able to show that they could hear. But the whole initial experiment was a complete washout. Oh, no. I mean, we learned so much. I don't want to complain, but I originally thought that the female geckos would zigzag towards the male gecko, you know, detecting sound from one direction and then staring in the opposite direction so they could get a bead on the male. But I must tell you from our later experiments that these are far more social animals than we thought. And when the females wandered up to the male burrows as we observed them, they seemed to know exactly where the males were. And the male geckos that were calling seemed to know exactly where the male competitors were. They spaced themselves out about every meter and a half in the good bits of bush in the desert. And we thought we were measuring them just about the time they were setting up their burrows because they were only just beginning to call, but they already knew where their competition was. And there were sounds that they responded to with the most interest, or really with their only interest, where the calls we had recorded four years previously, which we were playing from the array of Bluetooth speakers. Those they paid vigorous attention to, they got up on their front legs, and sometimes they even charged the speaker. And so I would say these animals knew a lot more about their environment than we initially gave them credit for. Well, I think these surprises in science can make it a lot of fun as well. And it sounds like you were able to turn this difficult project into a success. And I think it's so important to celebrate the wins in science because it can be difficult to get to that point. So, Katherine, do you have a favorite success story in science, whether it was a big winner, even just a small, but particularly meaningful one for you? I think everyone's favorite project is the one that they're doing at the moment. But I suppose I have a couple of those. We are asked when we put together our resumes to sort of list the things we have done that we think are important. I'd love working with my graduate students and research fellows. And there's a project I did with a graduate student who's now a research fellow at Hopkins. Her name is Dr. Grace Cappshaw. And Grace did a project that I really love. And it relates to our longstanding interest in how hearing evolved. And I don't know if everybody knows this, but hearing didn't evolve with animals on land. Fish in the sea share very well. Sand waves travel through water far better than they travel through land. And they stimulate fish century cells in the air. And so fish here, fish here well. The problem with the abolition of hearing comes when aquatic ancestors moved onto land. So, you just imagine that you are some vertebrate ancestor, sort of like a giant froggy thing crawling onto land. Or you sort of be like a fish with legs. And you can hear beautifully in water and you come onto land. And there's sand waves that you've been able to hear in water just bounce right off the skin of your head. Because sand waves travel seamlessly through water and into a fish's body because fish are mostly water. We're all mostly water. But when you come onto land, those sand waves do not pass smoothly through your head. They bounce off. It's an impedance mismatch. And this is the reason why animals like ourselves have developed these thin air drums that enable us to hear sound waves in air. Those sound waves that you're listening to right now are hitting your air drum as a pressure wave. And they move the air drum and then drive a series of small bones of your middle ear to stimulate the century cells of your inner ear. And how animals overcame this problem during evolution has been a perennial and deep problem in studying hearing. And my former student Grace Kapchord did some really important and innovative experiments that address this question. What Grace did is to find an animal that was more like the ancestral land vertebrates than ourselves. And for the study, what Grace did is to work on salamanders. These are small illusum fibions for those people who don't know what salamanders look like. They're very beautiful little amphibians that one finds in the leafless earth throughout American forests. And the salamanders that Grace worked on were salamanders that didn't have ear drums. One of the very first things that Grace did was to look at the structure of their inner ear and they may have not had an outer ear, but she did find that they had the sensory cells that should respond to sound as well as the sensory organs that respond to balance. And then what she did is she looked very carefully at these salamanders which belonged to a group called plethodons. And she looked at literally hundreds of different species. And what she did is she compared the structure of the inner ear in all these different salamanders. She looked at ones that live in bromeliaids and clandetries. She lived at ones that live in the leafletter. And she looked at those that live in caves. And there are a group of these salamanders that live almost entirely in caves and might thus be more dependent on being able to hear than say the ones that lived in the leafletter. And Grace did a careful analysis of the structure of the ears of these salamanders and found indeed that the ones that lived in caves and might need sound the most had the largest and best developed regions of the inner ear. And this tells us something scientifically really important which is that although these animals are not hearing specialists, that there is something for evolution to act on. The ones that are most likely to need to hear sound are the ones that have the best developed inner ear regions. And so this means that as evolution winds slowly through the millennia, you one could imagine a scenario where the inner ear of these animals might progressively show evolutionary changes. That was a very interesting study, but I'd like to talk about what Grace did next, which is after showing that there was some room for evolution to act on the inner ears of salamanders, she then took the same auditory brainstem response recordings that are used to see if babies can hear. And she tested the hearing of a number of different salamanders. We kept a whole colony of different salamanders we got from museums and zoos. They're very small, they're only a few inches long, she was able to keep them on wingless fruit flies and eventually at the end of her PhD to adopt them all out. Her salamanders can live quite a long time and these guys were only a few years old. So Grace studied the hearing of a group of salamanders, those that lived in leaflettern, those that lived in caves, and she found again that the animals that were cave dwelling had the most sense to carry, supporting all her observations about them having the best developed ears. And so then the question is could these animals that didn't look at all their hearing specialists could they even tell where sound was coming from. And again she took each little salamander and she put it in the middle of a big sound and she played sound from an array of speakers around the salamander's head and she found in fact that not only could these salamanders hear but also that their ability to hear was directional. They were more sensitive to sound coming from one side of the body than sound coming from in front of them, for example. And so these basic observations give us a completely plausible scenario for how hearing could have evolved as animals moved from water onto land by becoming progressively more sensitive to sound. Of course the really big breakthrough would come later on in evolutionary time because our biggest breakthrough in studying the evolution of hearing in land verispritz is when we focus on the development of the eardrum. And that's something that occurred multiple times during the evolution of land verispritz in the ancestors of modern frogs and in the ancestors of reptiles and mammals. But that's a story perhaps for another day. Well Katherine I think this research is fascinating and I think when you get one of these very clear results it's so exciting in science and I think it can motivate you to sort of dig in and get even busier in the laboratory to work on new experiments and kind of follow the directions that the research takes you but we like to encourage our listeners to take a break to think broadly to read broadly. So I'd love to ask you do you have a book recommendation that you like to recommend for students or perhaps even friends? I think I'm going to recommend gaining ground. There was a Cambridge paleontologist called Jennifer Clark who wrote a book on this evolution of hearing. She's written you know many wonderful scientific papers. She's done a lot of work on sort of early verispritz but she also wrote a book about her main ideas and it's called gaining ground and it provides some very clear and fascinating insights into the evolution of verispritz. And it's very readable. Well this sounds like an excellent recommendation. I think finding these science authors who are able to really tell the story of science in these accessible ways is really exciting so we will definitely add this to our website for our listeners to find. And I think one of the other things that you've sort of hinted at through telling some of these stories of your research are the opportunities that you've had to travel as a scientist and I think these can be wonderful opportunities to see different parts of the world and meet with scientists from all over the world. So do you have an example, Catherine of one of the places that you've been to for science that was particularly memorable? Yes but it's like asking one to choose between favorites. When I was a graduate student I was fortunate enough to go and help one of my colleagues do fieldwork in Panama recording weekly electric fish and the Smithsonian Institution maintains a couple of facilities in Panama for studying tropical biology because the tropical world is so rich that biologists can learn a great deal from it. So I was very lucky to be able to go trampling around in the jungle in this case with equipment for recording the electrical signals of weekly electric fish and so if you haven't been to the tropics I totally recommend it. If you can't go to the tropics I must say that I think it's in St. Louis Missouri the big botanical gardens has a wonderful tropical exhibit and now also mention the South African deserts. Of course. Good. So speaking to people who are not doing research in remote locations one can often go to these locations as the volunteer. Many places including the Kurman River Reserve in the northern Cape of southern Africa will take volunteers to come and help with some of the scientific measurements studying the meerkats for example. And so if you're interested in that way I would strongly recommend going as a volunteer to southern Africa and if you're not able to do that I would really recommend doing what I do which is to volunteer for your local state park system there's always more to do than there are people to do it. And so just get out there and do some work in their environment. I love that. I think these volunteer opportunities are wonderful ways to gain experience you know for people who might be early in their scientific careers but also people who might be later in their careers are perhaps outside of science altogether at this point who might just want the opportunity to be in nature and to kind of learn more about the science that's happening out there in the world. So can you tell us what made this trip to Panama particularly memorable where there's specific memories it sounds like this was perhaps early in your career was this one of your first field experiences. No because I think I might have mentioned that I'd wanted to be a biologist my whole life so I spent my whole life passing around looking at animals but southern Africa is mostly Chaparral and desert this is my first exposure to the tropics and it was amazing in our temperate forests there are probably you know sort of 10 species of common species of trees that you might see around you if you're looking but if you go down to the tropics that biodiversity just goes through the roof there might be a hundred species of tree for example not to mention all the other different plants and animals and so the depth of biological diversity was a will eye-opening for me and then also to be able to observe weekly electric fish in the field was just phenomenal you could look at a placid little stream running through the forest you know with tree roots tripping down into it and until you put an electric detector of weekly electric fields you would have no clue as to the diversity of weekly electric fish that were just sort of fighting among the tree roots of the river bank or at night signaling to each other with electrical signals and so it was a very wonderful experience and I remain eternally grateful to the very kind biologist who had me helper in this work well this sounds like an amazing experience and I love hearing about some of these travel opportunities that people have but I think oftentimes they highlight also just the people that you're able to work with in science you mentioned this biologist who was willing to kind of take you on help with this project and I think the people in science are so wonderful there are so many funny creative amazing folks and that's often not how scientists are portrayed in the media unfortunately oh you know there's funny movies with people with manic expressions and wide cuts here the wild hair science is intensely collaborative because there's so much to do the personal I went and worked with in Panama we don't actually work together but we share our success stories I was very lucky to work with a woman now at the Smithsonian called Dr. Mary Haggadon who you can find if you look on the web help Mary save Carl Mary took her fish experience and then went on to study different aquatic creatures ending up trying to address this very serious problem that faces everyone interested in tropical ecosystems which is how to preserve the species of coral that are dying all around us because of global warming and Mary and I remain in close contact and I continue to try and support her work because many scientists see the very serious problems facing the world because of global warming and now trying to do what they can absolutely I think these conservation efforts are tremendously important and I appreciate you sharing this story and this resource listeners will have to check it out and I think being able to work with scientists you know you encounter these quirky traditions in different laboratories or different field sites perhaps or just share these wonderful funny memories with colleagues do you have an example Catherine of one of these sort of human moments in science that goes against some of the stereotypes that people may have of scientists well I went to the Calahari as I just got with my friends Jacob Christians and Dalsgard and Michael Cherry and we had to fend for ourselves and I was very lucky to go with two chefs because both of these kind people are the cooks in their families and when we firstly got our nice successful results being able to show that the geckos are into sound I think Jacob used some of the last of our flour and he made a large pie and he put a little gecko made in pastry on top of the and that was what we had for dinner last night I love that what kind of pie was it you know I don't know it was probably chicken and potato because I don't think we've been vegetarian and we were making sure that we didn't run out of supplies before we had to go back to real life well that sounds delicious and beautiful with the little gecko on top I love it well I appreciate you sharing some of these stories that you've had with your colleagues and I think you're absolutely right it showcases this other side of science that so many people don't get to see and I think you are very serious you work hard on the projects that you're doing in the laboratory because it is very important to be making progress to be making these discoveries but oftentimes things like limited funding or shortages of staff and problems with technology feasibility all of these barriers exist that sort of prevent scientists from being able to answer all of the questions I'd like to answer so if we took away the barriers Katherine for a day what is the one question that you would want to answer most there are different classes of question there are questions about the animal and how it fits into its environment and for that I'd have to think a bit there's a class of neurobiological questions that I regard as both very important and also only just becoming accessible and that class of problems relates to development of a whole new technology for looking at how brain cells interact when the animal is behaving in its natural environment scientists have addressed the question of how animals perceive the world around them by using reduced preparations where you have everything in a laboratory and very precisely controlled and then you try and tie that to observations made in the field but I think for the future we may very well be able to get better observations of how all the neurons in the brain interact when an animal is in its natural environment and for that many of the big breakthroughs are going to come from looking at small semi-transparent animals like fruit flies and also combining that ability to record from large data sets of an active brain then combining that with the increasingly powerful computer-aided analyses of large ensembles should I think lead to big insights and to how brains really work well Catherine as a neuroscientist myself you've got my attention I think this is a fascinating area of research so thank you for giving me and our listeners a big question to pondo today and I'd love to end our conversation by circling back and talking about advice so if our listeners out there are on their own journey and they are feeling stuck do you have a piece of advice that somebody gave you that was really helpful for you that you can pay forward and share with them today yes I think so but it's not going to be all that rosy because a lot of science is about failure but you learn from failure because it lets you rethink your questions and so my best advice is if things fail just take yourself off go for a walk think it over and try again when I was a graduate student I tried so hard to do a very difficult experiment or just months months maybe year of just trying to understand some parts of the electric fishbrain and I think I finally just got it I remember running around the building late at night on a Saturday night and there was nobody to tell I had finally cracked this particular problem and so just persist don't give up correct these questions are hard but they're worth working hard at I think that's wonderful advice do you have any other last note of inspiration or last piece of advice that you'd like to share with our listeners as we wrap up our conversation I think I told you the important things finding the right mentors is very important you learn a lot from the people who supervise you and the people who you work with and then the next thing is to try and identify a problem that you find personally worthwhile and was working hard at I think that is a wonderful note and on Catherine if our listeners would like to learn more about you and the exciting research that you're doing what is the best way for them to do so well you can find my lab website at the University of Maryland and that contains a lot of information and then you can look for my papers on PubMed scientists trying to publicize regularly what they do because off from our research is funded by taxpayer dollars and we try and make it important and relevant and so I would suggest that you use those kinds of resources wonderful well listeners and definitely learn more about Catherine and the exciting work that she is doing in her laboratory and Catherine it's been such a pleasure to chat with you today thank you so much for your time are you so welcome and thank you to our listeners out there for tuning in we hope you'll join us next time for another episode of people behind the science